<<<PDF_PAGE_1>>>
Create Growth Programme FY 22/23-24/25: Guidance for Applicants
Content:
1. Summary
2. Context of the grant programme
2. 1. Strategic Context
2. 2. The Creative Scale Up Pilot
3. Overview of the Create Growth Programme
3. 1. Target Market
3. 2. Support Package
3. 3. Delivery
3. 4. Objectives and Outputs
3. 5. Budget
4. Grant funding for shortlisted applicants
5. Eligibility
5. 1. Who can apply
5. 2. Applications from consortia
5. 3. Multiple Applications
6. Application instructions and timelines
6. 1. Instructions for submitting an Expression of Interest
6. 2. Instructions for submitting a full application
6. 3. Timelines
7. Assessment criteria
7. 1. Expressions of Interest
7. 2. Full applications
7. 3. Scoring Criteria
7. 4. Balancing
8. Grant requirements
Applicants should read all sections of this document carefully before applying for funding.
Please use the Expression of Interest (EOI) Form provided to submit your EOI.
<<<PDF_PAGE_2>>>
1. Summary
The Creative Industries are one of the fastest growing sectors of the UK economy, providing
significant local employment opportunities and economic benefits. The Department for Digital,
Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) is inviting local area partnerships in England (except London)
to submit Expressions of Interest (EOIs) to participate in the Create Growth Programme (CGP)
from FY22/23 to FY24/25 (three years). Each successful local area partnership will be awarded
approximately £1.275 million in grant funding for business support. Creative businesses in
participating local area partnerships will also have the opportunity to benefit from up to a £7
million fund for finance support, as well as investor networking activities.
The CGP is an expansion of the Creative Scale Up pilot (2019-2021), which provided the Greater
Manchester, West Midlands and West of England Combined Authorities with a package of
business and investor support for creative businesses to scale and access finance outside
London. The CGP will build on the success of the pilot to provide six regions in England, outside
London, with a bespoke package to support high-growth potential creative businesses and build
investor networks. The support package will comprise three complementary strands: business
support targeted at the creative industries; finance; and investor capacity building activities.
Local area partnerships will deliver targeted business support to high-growth potential creative
businesses. It is expected that participation in the CGP will help to build local knowledge,
capacity and infrastructure to support creative businesses beyond the programme.
A national delivery provider will be appointed to deliver finance to creative businesses and
investor capacity building activities, as well as to provide the administration and monitoring of the
programme across the six participating regions. It is intended that local area partnerships and the
national delivery provider will work closely together to ensure the programme meets its objectives
and outcomes.
The deadline for EOIs is 23:59 hrs BST, Thursday 7 July 2022. An EOI Form should be
completed using the template provided and submitted via this email: creategrowth@dcms.gov.uk.
EOI applicants will be shortlisted by a panel appointed by DCMS. Shortlisted applicants will be
invited to submit full applications to bid to participate in the programme. Full applications will be
assessed by a panel appointed by DCMS using the scoring system outlined in section 7.3 of this
document. Applications will also be reviewed against a set of balancing criteria outlined in section
7.4 of this document. If you are invited to submit a full application, this is not a guarantee that the
application will be successful. The deadline for full applications is 23:59 hrs BST, Thursday
25 August 2022. Full applications should be completed using the template provided and
submitted via this email: creategrowth@dcms.gov.uk.
As part of the EOI stage, DCMS is inviting local area partnerships to apply for grants of up to a
maximum of £10,000 (ten thousand pounds) to support them in developing full applications to the
CGP if they are shortlisted. Only shortlisted applicants that can demonstrate a clear need for a
grant to develop a full application will be awarded grant funding. The grant must be spent on
activities to support full applications to the CGP.
2
<<<PDF_PAGE_3>>>
2. Context of the grant programme
2. 1. Strategic context
The creative industries (CIs) are one of the fastest growing sectors in the UK economy. Pre-
pandemic, in 2019 the CIs generated £115.9 billion in Gross Value Added (GVA) and employed
2.1 million people - or approximately 6.3% of the economy (DCMS Economic Estimates). Despite
the disproportionate impact of Covid-19 on many creative sub-sectors, as of December 2021
monthly GVA for the CIs is estimated to be 3.2% greater than pre-pandemic levels in 2020
(DCMS Economic Estimates).
The CIs high-growth potential was recognised by this Government in its ‘Build Back Better: our
plan for growth’ (March 2021), where it was identified as a priority sector for driving post-
pandemic recovery. DCMS’s forthcoming Creative Industries Sector Vision will set a clear and
ambitious vision for supporting our high-growth creative industries. The CGP will play an
important role in delivering this objective.
Moreover, with 47 identified creative clusters located across the UK, the CIs can play a critical
role in supporting the Government’s Levelling Up objectives. The CGP was recognised in the
Government’s Levelling Up White Paper (February 2022) as a key intervention for driving
economic growth and boosting productivity, pay, jobs and living standards across regions.
However, despite the CIs growth potential, there are distinct market and information failures that
prevent creative businesses scaling and accessing finance outside of London. The creative
sector - predominantly made up of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) - lacks capacity
and access to expertise on business planning and finance advice, as well as wider support
programmes. Creative businesses produce intangible intellectual property, which creates barriers
to accessing traditional sources of finance. Additionally, information failures mean private
investors can struggle to understand the sector and to measure investment risk.
2. 2. The Creative Scale Up pilot (2019-2021)
In 2019, the Creative Scale Up pilot was launched with £4 million of Government funding as part
of the Creative Industries Sector Deal (2018) (see link). The pilot provided three Combined
Authorities (Greater Manchester, West of England and West Midlands) with a bespoke package
to support creative businesses at the scaling stage and to build investor networks. More
information on the pilot can be found at the participating Combined Authority web pages below:
● Greater Manchester Combined Authority;
● West of England Combined Authority;
● West Midlands Combined Authority.
Since the pilot’s launch, it has supported over 200 businesses and engaged with 215 investors.
The pilot’s evaluation identified that, after 12 months of participating in the pilot, businesses on
average experienced increases in turnover of £91,000 (per business) and employment growth of
23%. UK Business Angels Association have estimated that the approximate investment capacity
to date of investors registered to the toolkit developed in the pilot is in the range of £149 million
and £303 million.
3
<<<PDF_PAGE_4>>>
3. Overview of the Create Growth Programme
3. 1. Target Market
The Create Growth Programme will build on the success of DCMS’s Creative Scale Up pilot. One
of the learnings identified from the pilot evaluation was that there is a pipeline of high-growth
potential creative businesses, not yet at the scaling stage, which can benefit from the support
offer provided and become investment ready. The CGP has therefore been designed to support
creative businesses, with high-growth potential, between the seed and scaling stages.
DCMS will work with the national delivery partner, successful local area partnerships and industry
experts to refine criteria for selecting high-growth potential businesses during the course of the
programme. As initial guidance, we understand ‘high-growth potential’ businesses as those
demonstrating the following characteristics:
● Turnover growth of 10% year-on-year over approximately 3 years (including either prior
to or during the pandemic);
● Employing a minimum of 2 people over the last two years (full-time, part-time or
freelance);
● Created a revenue generating product, launched a new platform or service or reached a
market of scale;
● Generated a sales revenue in the last 2 years.
For the purpose of the Create Growth Programme, creative businesses refers to those with a
high intensity of creative occupations. Please refer to DCMS Economic Estimates, available here,
for a list of the sub-sectors and their associated SIC codes that DCMS classifies under the
creative industries. Sub-sectors under the creative industries include: Advertising and Marketing;
Architecture; Crafts; Design and Designer Fashion; Film, TV, Video, Radio and Photography; IT,
Software and Computer Services; Publishing; Museums, Galleries and Libraries; Music,
Performing and Visual Arts.
3. 2. Support Package
The CGP will provide participating regions with a bespoke support package comprising of the
following complementary elements:
● Business Support - Bespoke business support that is tailored to the specific needs of
high-growth potential creative businesses, with the aim of building businesses’
management skills and understanding of different finance routes to support business
growth and investment readiness. It is expected that the support offer will include a suite
of workshops, one-to-one mentoring and peer-learning. Content is expected to focus on
areas where CI specific advice is needed (eg. Intellectual Property, business models
and access to new markets). For generic business support, businesses will be referred
elsewhere.
● Investor Capacity Building - The aim of the investor capacity building element is to
increase the number of private investors willing to invest in creative businesses outside
London, through educating investors about investment opportunities in the sector and
building investor networks. Building on the Creative Scale Up pilot, it will include a
4
<<<PDF_PAGE_5>>>
combination of pitching events, investor outreach and an investor toolkit (building on the
Invest in Creative toolkit developed during the pilot).
● Finance - Targeted finance will be provided to selected businesses that can
demonstrate through a diagnostic assessment that it will act as a stimulus for growth
and investment, through leveraging in further private investment.
3. 3. Delivery
Building on the success of the CSU pilot, the business support element of the CGP is to be
delivered directly by local area partnerships to allow flexibility to meet local needs. The local
delivery of business support aims to build long-term legacy infrastructure, skills and capacity for
supporting creative businesses in areas beyond the programme. DCMS view there to be
considerable benefits in local area partnerships working with relevant experts in the creative
sector in developing and delivering the business support package. This will help ensure that it
meets the specific needs of creative businesses and complements other activities and
programmes already existing in the area. We recommend that local area partnerships draw on
existing networks and industry expertise wherever possible.
A national delivery provider will be appointed to deliver the finance and investor capacity building
elements of the programme across participating regions. The national delivery provider will also
oversee the administration of the programme and monitoring and evaluation across participating
regions.
It is intended that the national delivery provider and local area partnerships will work closely
together and engage industry expertise to ensure the programme meets its objectives and
outcomes. All local area partnerships applying to the CGP are expected to work jointly with other
participating local areas, the national delivery partner and industry experts.
3. 4. Objectives and outputs of the Create Growth Programme
The objectives of the Create Growth Programme are to:
● Support high-growth potential creative businesses to become investment ready
outside of London, by developing businesses’ knowledge, skills and access to finance.
● Increase the number of investors willing to invest in creative businesses outside of
London, by educating and developing investor networks.
To support these objectives, local area partnerships will be asked to provide the following
activities and outputs:
Business Support
● Develop a targeted business support package specific to high-growth potential creative
businesses, including a suite of workshops, one-to-one mentoring and peer learning
activities;
● Procure workshop facilitators and mentors to deliver the business support programme;
● Identify businesses into appropriate cohorts, based on their growth stage, business
model and/or sub-sector;
● Baseline and track the performance of participating businesses and those that applied
and were unsuccessful to support the evaluation of the programme;
5
<<<PDF_PAGE_6>>>
● Support the ongoing investor capacity building strand of the programme, through
collecting and providing relevant data and aligning the business support programme with
investor workshops and pitching events;
● Refer businesses to other regional business support programmes, where appropriate.
This includes businesses which are unsuccessful at the initial application stage, but could
benefit from other existing regional support offers; it also includes businesses that are
selected for the programme, but where a specific support need is best met through
another existing regional programme;
● Work with the national delivery partner to ensure the business support package aligns
with and complements the finance and investor capacity building elements of the
programme;
● Share best practice on developing and delivering the business support offer across other
participating regions.
Comms
● Develop marketing, communications campaigns and events across regions to
encourage business applications.
Governance
● Support the evaluation of the programme through collecting data on participating
regional businesses and the business support offer and sharing this with the evaluators,
the national delivery provider and DCMS. The CGP provides a significant opportunity to
improve data on creative businesses at a local level, which will help improve the
targeting of future policies and programmes to support the CIs;
● Maintain an up-to-date risk register for the business support package and escalate any
risks that materialise to the national delivery provider and DCMS;
● Audit assurance and compliance;
● Provide progress and performance reports to the national delivery provider and DCMS.
3. 5. Budget
The Create Growth Programme has a budget of £17.51 million over three financial years
(FY22/23-24/25). Each successful local area partnership will be awarded approximately £1.275
million in grant funding to deliver the business support package across three financial years. In
addition to this, businesses across participating local area partnerships will have the opportunity
to benefit from up to a £7 million fund for finance support. Local area partnerships will also benefit
from the investor capacity building activities developed through the programme.
4. Grant funding for Shortlisted Applicants
DCMS recognises the resource pressures that bidding for competitive funding places on local
areas and that there are discrepancies between areas in their access to resources to develop
funding applications. As part of the EOI stage, DCMS is therefore inviting local area partnerships
to apply for grants of up to a maximum of £10,000 (ten thousand pounds) to be used to support
the development of full applications to the CGP if shortlisted.
Local area partnerships are asked to specify in the EOI Form under Section 4 the amount of
grant needed up to a maximum of £10,000 and demonstrate a clear justification for how the grant
6
<<<PDF_PAGE_7>>>
will help them to develop full proposals for the competition. Only shortlisted applicants that can
demonstrate a clear need for a grant to develop a full application will be awarded application
grant funding.
The application grant must be spent on activities to support full applications to the CGP. This
could include:
● Agency staff/consultancy for bid writing;
● Consultation;
● Data gathering and analysis;
● Industry expertise.
If your proposal for an application grant is accepted, this is not a guarantee that the full
application to the CGP will be successful.
5. Eligibility
Please read the eligibility requirements for the programme carefully. If you do not meet the
eligibility requirements, it will not be possible to consider your application.
5. 1. Who can apply?
The programme is open to EOIs from local area partnerships in England and outside of London
only. London boroughs and the Greater London Authority are excluded from applying to the
programme either as a stand alone application or as part of a consortium bid. The CGP is
focused on supporting creative businesses and unlocking economic growth in other parts of the
country.
Applicants must be either a Combined Authority, Local Authority or Local Enterprise Partnership
(LEP). In the case of a consortium application, the lead organisation must be either a Combined
Authority, Local Authority or LEP.
There is no predetermined minimum or maximum size of geographical area(s) that can apply.
However, local area partnerships will be assessed on their capacity to deliver on the stated
objectives of the CGP and will be required to demonstrate there are enough businesses in the
area that can benefit from the programme and sufficient local infrastructure to support businesses
beyond the programme. It is therefore suggested that local area partnerships should, where
existing, be a Mayoral Combined Authority or a consortium of upper tier and unitary authorities
elsewhere.
5. 2. Applications from consortia
One organisation must act as the lead organisation and submit the application. Applications from
consortia should be submitted once only, by the lead organisation.
Please note that DCMS is unable to award a grant to multiple organisations. The lead
organisation would therefore need to be responsible for distributing funding through an invoicing
arrangement and managing working relations with the other partners. The lead partner is the
responsible organisation who will share the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) and
determination letters with all parties involved.
7
<<<PDF_PAGE_8>>>
5. 3. Multiple applications
Lead organisations are eligible to submit a single application only. Local organisations (Combined
Authorities, Local Authorities, LEPs) applying as part of a consortium bid, either as a lead or non-
lead, will count as one application. They must not submit a separate, stand-alone application and
an application as part of a consortium, either as a lead or non-lead.
6. Application instructions and timelines
6.1 Instructions for submitting an Expression of Interest (EOI)
The Create Growth Programme will open for EOI applications from Thursday 9 June 2022 to
Thursday 7 July 2022, 23:59hrs BST. Any EOI forms received after the closing date will not be
considered.
The EOI form will include an eligibility questionnaire which must be completed. The EOI form will
also give you the opportunity to describe your proposal in no more than 1000 words against the
criteria outlined in section 7 of this document.
If you wish to apply for grant funding to support the development of a full application if you are
shortlisted, then please complete Section 4 of the EOI Form.
To apply, please submit your EOI form to creategrowth@dcms.gov.uk adding “EOI CGP” and the
lead organisation name to the subject line.
6. 2. Instructions for submitting a full application
All EOI applicants will be informed whether or not they have been successful at the shortlist
stage. Shortlisted applicants will then be invited to submit a full application using a provided
template and submit evidence against the set of predefined criteria outlined in section 7 of this
document. Only full applications from shortlisted applicants invited to apply will be assessed. If
you are invited to submit a full application, this is not a guarantee that the application will be
successful.
Please submit your full application adding “Full Application CGP” and the name of the lead
organisation to the subject line to this email: creategrowth@dcms.gov.uk
Full applications will be assessed by a panel appointed by DCMS using the scoring system
outlined in section 7.3 of this document. Applications will also be reviewed against a set of
balancing criteria outlined in section 7.4 of this document.
The application process is outlined below:
● Submit EOI form;
● DCMS undertakes eligibility check;
● DCMS appointed panel reviews EOI;
● Applicants informed of EOI outcome and applications for grant funding to support full
applications;
8
<<<PDF_PAGE_9>>>
● Shortlisted applicants are invited to submit full applications. Those successful in applying
for grant funding to support full applications will receive grant funding;
● DCMS appointed panel assesses applications against criteria;
● DCMS appointed panel reviews applications against balancing criteria;
● All applicants are informed of the decision outcome.
All available information and guidance relating to the application to the CGP is contained within
this document. The Creative Economy Team in DCMS can answer questions related to the
application process and eligibility. However, as the application process is competitive, they are
unable to provide any support in completing the application. If you have a question, please
contact this email: creategrowth@dcms.gov.uk
6. 3. Timelines
The EOI will open for applications on Thursday 9 June 2022. The closing date for submitting
EOI applications is 23:59hrs BST, Thursday 7 July 2022.
All EOI applicants will be informed whether or not they have been successful at the shortlist stage
by Thursday 21 July 2022.
Shortlisted applicants will then be invited to submit a full application by 23:59hrs BST, Thursday
25 August 2022. Only shortlisted applicants will be eligible to submit full applications. Applicants
should expect to be notified of the decision outcome in September 2022.
The programme is expected to launch in Autumn 2022. All funding must be accounted for by 31
March 2025.
7. Assessment Criteria
7. 1. Expression of Interest Form
The following sections of the Expression of Interest (EOI) form must be completed for the
application to be considered.
Section 1: Eligibility Questionnaire: Essential Criteria
All applicants are required to complete the eligibility questionnaire with essential criteria.
Essential criteria must be met by all applicants to qualify for the EOI stage. If these essential
criteria are not met, the EOI application concerned will not be considered.
Essential criteria:
1. The entity bidding must be either a Combined Authority, Local Authority or Local
Enterprise Partnership (LEP). In the case of a consortium of bidders, the lead
organisation must be either a Combined Authority, Local Authority or Local Enterprise
Partnership (LEP).
2. The entity bidding (and all members of a consortium) must be in England or deliver the
programme outputs and objectives in England.
9
<<<PDF_PAGE_10>>>
3. The entity bidding (and all members of a consortium) must be outside London or deliver
the programme outputs and objectives outside London. London boroughs and the
Greater London Authority are not eligible to apply.
Section 2: Local Area Partnership details
Section 2 of the EOI form is intended to capture key details about the lead organisation and
consortium members (if applicable) of the local area partnership applying. Please make sure this
information is accurate as it will inform DCMS’s due diligence and risk assessment checks.
Section 3: Proposal
Section 3 of the EOI form will give you the opportunity to provide a response in no more than
1000 words to the following criteria:
● Characteristics of place: local creative businesses and infrastructure (200 words
max):
○ Briefly describe the creative sector in your region, including the types of creative
businesses by sub-sector and growth stage, creative infrastructure and investor
communities that are present.
○ Which existing or future regional support offers (both CI-specific and sector
agnostic) are present in the region that businesses could be referred to or could
provide feeder or follow-on support? This could include but is not limited to
growth hubs, innovation accelerators and regional business support or funding
programmes.
● Programe need (200 words max):
○ Briefly describe the need for the programme in the region and how high-growth
potential creative businesses are currently under-served by support offers.
○ Please confirm that the programme does not duplicate other existing support
offers in the region. Where there are similar programmes being delivered, please
explain how the Create Growth Programme will provide additional benefits to
high-growth potential creative businesses and the investor community.
● Local organisational capacity (200 words max):
○ Briefly describe your previous experience in delivering comparable programmes,
either sector agnostic or targeted at the creative industries. Describe how you will
either draw on existing organisational skills and resources or engage specialist
expertise to deliver the programme.
○ Explain how the programme will be monitored and reported (this should include
financial expenditure and intended outcomes and benefits).
● Programme legacy (200 words max):
○ Explain how the programme’s stated objectives align with existing or future local
cultural, creative industries and economic growth strategies or plans.
○ Explain how you will support local economic growth and productivity in the
creative sector beyond the CGP. DCMS welcomes local area partnerships to
identify opportunities for additional funding to support the continuation of the
programme beyond its lifecycle or to support complementary feeder and follow-
on programmes.
○ Explain how the programme will help to build capacity in the local area
partnership team for supporting the CIs.
10
<<<PDF_PAGE_11>>>
● Equality, diversity and inclusion (200 words max):
○ Briefly explain how as part of the CGP you intend to engage diverse businesses,
employing those with protected characteristics;
○ Please also describe how the business support offer provided will support
businesses in diversifying their workforce and open up opportunities for those
with protected characteristics.
Section 4: Application Grants (optional)
If you wish to apply for grant funding to support the development of a full application to the CGP if
you are shortlisted, then please complete Section 4 of the EOI Form according to the template
provided.
To be eligible to apply for an application grant, you must confirm the following:
● The bidder has not previously been successful in bidding for public or private funding to
deliver similar programmes;
● The bidder is not currently in receipt of public or private funding for delivering similar
proposals or programmes.
You will be required to specify the following:
● The amount of funding you need up to a maximum of £10,000 (ten thousand pounds);
● Why you need the grant to develop a full application (150 words max). You must
demonstrate that you do not currently have sufficient resource in place for developing an
application and that there is a clear need for the use of grant funding to develop a full
application;
● What activities you will spend the grant on to support the development of an application
to the CGP. This could include, but is not limited to, the following:
■ Agency staff/consultancy for bid writing;
■ Consultation;
■ Data gathering and analysis;
■ Industry expertise.
7. 2. Full application form
If you are shortlisted at the EOI stage, you will be invited to submit a full application form. Please
note that this is not a guarantee that the application will be successful. You will be provided with a
full application form that will require you to expand on the response you provided in the EOI form
and provide evidence against the following criteria:
● Section one: Characteristics of place: local creative businesses and infrastructure
- Local area partnerships should demonstrate that they have a large enough cluster (or
group of clusters) of creative businesses with suitable growth prospects to enable
meaningful engagement with and impact from the programme and there is sufficient
local infrastructure to support businesses beyond the programme. This includes:
○ How many creative businesses in the region do you estimate engaging as part of
the programme?
○ Which creative sub-sectors are covered by these businesses?
○ How do these businesses meet the description of ‘high-growth potential’?
11
<<<PDF_PAGE_12>>>
○ Which existing or future regional support offers (both CI-specific and sector
agnostic) are present in the region that businesses could be referred to or could
provide feeder or follow-on support? This could include but is not limited to
growth hubs, innovation accelerators and regional business support or funding
programmes.
● Section two: Programme need - Local area partnerships should demonstrate that
there is unmet demand for the programme and that it will build on and not duplicate
existing activity in the region. This includes:
○ Describe the need for the programme in the region and how creative businesses
are currently under-served by support offers.
○ Please confirm that the programme does not duplicate other existing support
offers in the region. Where there are similar programmes being delivered, please
explain how the Create Growth Programme will provide additional benefits to
businesses and the investor community.
● Section three: Local organisational capacity - Local area partnerships should
demonstrate that they have the capacity, skills and resources to deliver the programme,
as well as sufficient understanding of, and partnerships with, creative businesses and
networks in their region. This includes:
○ Briefly describe your previous experience in delivering comparable programmes,
either sector agnostic or targeted at the creative industries. Describe how you will
either draw on existing organisational skills and resources or engage specialist
expertise to deliver the programme.
○ Explain how you intend to engage with creative industry expertise in developing
the business support package;
○ How you will resource activity (eg. additional staff recruitment, training
requirements or procuring third party providers);
○ How you will undertake the procurement activity for the project (if applicable), in
line with Public Contracts Regulations 2015;
○ Provide evidence of your organisation’s financial stability, appropriate
governance and an ability to administer and account for the grant. In the event of
a consortium bid, all bidding organisations must provide evidence of financial
stability and the presence of appropriate governance arrangements between all
consortium members;
○ Provide outline costs of how you intend to spend the grant to deliver the business
programme, including salaries of staff and contractors;
○ Provide a summary of key risks relating to the delivery of the programme and
how these will be monitored and managed;
○ Explain how you intend to monitor and report on the programme (this should
include expenditure; timetable; outcomes and benefits). Describe the financial
management systems and processes you intend to put in place. Please provide a
clear proposal for how much funding will be drawn down each month from
September 2022 to March 2025 and describe how this will be accounted for.
12
<<<PDF_PAGE_13>>>
● Section four: Programme legacy - Local area partnerships should demonstrate how
the programme will support them in developing partnerships and building long-term
capacity and legacy infrastructure to support the creative industries in their area after the
programme ends. This includes:
○ How does the programme’s stated objectives align with existing or future local
cultural, creative industries and economic growth strategies or plans?
○ How will you support local economic growth and productivity in the creative
sector beyond the CGP? DCMS welcomes local area partnerships to identify
opportunities for additional funding to support the continuation of the programme
beyond its lifecycle or to support complementary feeder and follow-on
programmes.
○ Briefly describe how the programme will support you to strengthen local
understanding and partnerships with CI businesses within the region and how it
will help to build capacity in the local area partnership team for supporting the
CIs;
○ Briefly describe how the programme will support you to strengthen investor
networks willing to invest in the CIs within region.
● Section five: Equality, diversity and inclusion - Local area partnerships should
demonstrate their commitment to opening up access and broadening the diversity of
workforce in creative businesses in their area.This includes:
○ Briefly describe how you intend to engage diverse businesses, employing those
with protected characteristics, as part of the CGP;
○ Please also describe how the business support offer provided will support
businesses in diversifying their workforce and open up opportunities for those
with protected characteristics;
○ Explain how you will monitor the diversity of workforce in the businesses
supported.
7. 3. Scoring criteria
The essential criteria listed in section 7.1 of this document must be met by all EOI applicants to
qualify for the shortlisting stage. If the essential criteria are not met, the EOI application will not be
considered.
If the essential criteria are met, EOIs will be reviewed by a Panel appointed by DCMS. As part of
the EOI process, DCMS will use any other information we hold about the lead applicant or
consortium member. We may share your application with expert stakeholders or other
government departments for their review and comment to help inform the panel’s decision.
The application will be scored using the weighting system detailed overleaf.
13
<<<PDF_PAGE_14>>>
Section Weighting
1. Characteristic of Place: Local Creative 25
Businesses and Infrastructure
2. Programme Need 25
3. Local Organisational Capacity 20
4. Programme Legacy 20
5. Equality, diversity and inclusion 10
Each section of an application will be evaluated and marked on a scale of 0-4 where:
0 = Serious concerns (e.g. application does not meet requirements and/or raises serious
concerns)
1 = Minor concerns (e.g. application meets some requirements but with gaps and/or some minor
concerns)
2 = Adequate confidence (e.g. application meets most/all requirements and provides a detailed
response but lacks evidence in minor areas)
3 = Good confidence (e.g. application meets all requirements and provides a detailed response
but lacks evidence in minor areas)
4 = Excellent confidence (e.g. application meets all requirements and provides a detailed
response and evidence which demonstrates a particularly strong understanding of the
requirements)
Your overall score will be a percentage and will be determined by the marks awarded for each
criteria (out of 4) in accordance with the applicable weighting. For example, if the weighting for a
question is 20%, a mark of 4 for that question would lead to a score of 20%, a mark of 3 for that
question would lead to a score of 15%, a mark of 2 for that question would lead to a score of
10%, a mark of 1 for that question would lead to a score of 5%, and a mark of 0 would lead to a
score of 0%. DCMS reserves the right to reject any bidder who scores 0 in any of the questions
and/or achieves an overall score of less than 50%.
7. 6 Balancing Criteria
The Create Growth Programme seeks to support a range of creative sub-sectors and a good
geographical spread of regions across England. In addition to the main criteria, at the full
application stage DCMS will use a set of balancing criteria to differentiate between a number of
proposals that are considered fundable. The Panel appointed by DCMS will balance applications
across the following criteria:
● Geographic spread - DCMS will look to ensure a fair spread of successful regions
across England.
● Creative sub-sectors - Different regions may have particular strengths in specific
creative sub-sectors (eg. film, video games, fashion and publishing). DCMS will look to
ensure that the portfolio of regions participating in the CGP supports businesses across
a range of creative sub-sectors.
14
<<<PDF_PAGE_15>>>
● Growth potential - DCMS will look to support regions that are identified as having
growth potential for the creative industries. We realise that regions will be starting with
different levels of existing infrastructure and at different growth stages. We will look to
target those regions where the programme will be most additive and have the greatest
impact on driving growth. DCMS will draw on relevant research and data sets on
creative scale up firms in regions to support the assessment of a region’s growth
potential.
● Existing support for creative businesses - DCMS will look to support regions where
the programme can have maximum impact through aligning with other regional support
offers but also does not duplicate activity funded by other public or private investment.
8. Grant Requirements
Maximum grant value FY22/23-24/25
Successful applicants will be awarded a grant of approximately £1.275 million over three financial
years (FY22/23-24/25).
The value of the grant will be set out in the determination letter provided, which will be reviewed
and issued at least each financial year. DCMS will review the amount of grant being committed
based on a local area partnership’s performance against target and success measures for the
programme. Confirmed funding for FY 22/23 is approximately £425,000. Indicative Funding,
based on performance, for FY 23/24 and FY 24/25 is approximately £425,000. Payments will be
made monthly or quarterly (subject to agreement between DCMS and the local area partnerships
prior to signing the MoU).
Grant programme management
The Creative Economy Team in the Media and Creative Industries directorate at DCMS will
manage grants to local area partnerships.
For application grants to shortlisted applicants, the legal power is the UK Internal Market Act
2020, Section 50.
For successful applicants to the Create Growth Programme, the legal power for this grant is the
Local Government Act 2003, Section 31.
What to expect from DCMS if you are shortlisted
● We will carry out detailed due diligence and risk assessment checks, which may involve
requests for further information.
What to expect from DCMS if you are successful at the full application stage
● DCMS will send a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) and a determination letter, with
details of the value of the grant.
● Determination letters will be issued at least each financial year of the programme and
DCMS will review the value of the grant awarded on this basis. DCMS will review the
amount of grant being committed in the determination letter based on a local area
partnership’s performance against target and success measures for the programme.
15
<<<PDF_PAGE_16>>>
● The monitoring process between local area partnerships, DCMS and the national
delivery provider will be set out in the MoU.
● DCMS will work with the successful applicant on relevant public communications
regarding the CGP.
Checks you are expected to undergo
Your organisation will also need to pass DCMS’s due diligence checks, which ensure:
● You are not already receiving funding for this project from Government.
● That there is no indication of fraud. DCMS does not tolerate fraud, bribery or corruption.
Applications will be checked against various databases to assess accuracy of the
information provided. Fraud measurement and post-event assurance will also be carried
out throughout the programme.
● We expect applicants to provide further information, if requested, as the result of due
diligence and risk assessment checks.
Additionally, if you have been funded by another part of Government, we may seek feedback
from that department.
Financial requirements
1. The DCMS financial year runs 1st April to 31st March. All funds awarded through this
grant must be accounted for by 31st March 2025. If successful, your determination letter
will set out the committed amount of grant that DCMS will pay for the first financial year
(FY 22/23) and indicative amounts for the next two financial years (FY 23/24-24/25).
2. The grant award must not exceed 50% of your annual income/turnover or collective
annual income/turnover if you are applying as a formal consortium.
3. If you are shortlisted and invited to submit a full application, you will be asked to
describe the financial management systems and processes you will put in place. You will
also be expected to set out a clear proposal for how much funding will be drawn down
each month from September 2022 to March 2025.
4. Payments will be made monthly or quarterly (subject to agreement between DCMS and
the local area partnerships prior to signing the MoU).
5. If you believe there is a compelling reason to be paid at the point of need, please set this
out in your full application. Your request will be considered as part of the assessment
process and subsequent due diligence, but will not, in itself, disadvantage your
application.
Subsidy control
As of 1 January 2021, EU state aid rules no longer apply in the UK for new subsidies awarded
after that date. The UK has entered into a Trade and Cooperation Agreement with the EU, which
contains certain Subsidy Control provisions governing the award of subsidies by UK public
authorities that may affect trade and investment between the UK and the EU.
The current rules are explained in the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy
(BEIS) guidance Technical Guidance on the UK’s International Subsidy Control Commitments.
The Subsidy Control Act 2022 will come fully into force in October 2022.
16
<<<PDF_PAGE_17>>>
Local area partnerships will need to consider whether any grant funding they award is compliant
with rules on Subsidy Control applicable at the time of award.
17