<<<PDF_PAGE_1>>>
Lifecycle of a Project
2014-2020 European Structural and
Investment Funds Growth Programme
European Regional Development Fund
European Social Fund
Part of European Agricultural Funds for Rural Development
July 2015
July 2015
Department for Communities and Local Government
<<<PDF_PAGE_2>>>
Contents
Introduction ................................................................................................................... 3
Routes into the programme .......................................................................................... 6
Open calls ..................................................................................................................... 7
Entry via Co-financing Organisation ........................................................................... 12
The Application process ............................................................................................. 13
selection criteria and assessment and appraisal process ........................................... 17
Moving to Full Application ........................................................................................... 19
Contract management ................................................................................................ 22
Irregularities ................................................................................................................ 29
Project closure ............................................................................................................ 31
Document retention .................................................................................................... 31
2
<<<PDF_PAGE_3>>>
Introduction
“A single European Structural and Investment Funds Growth Programme for the 2014-2020
funding period has been set up to combine three separate European Funds. These are the
European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), the European Social Fund (ESF) and part of
the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD).” Read more here.
1. The details of the purpose and priorities for investment from the three funds is
described in the Operational Programme for each fund which can be found through
the link above. Readers are encouraged to familiarise themselves with the content
of the relevant Operational Programme. The Managing Authority manages each of
the funds:
a. European Regional Development Fund – Department for Communities and
Local Government;
b. European Social Fund – Department for Work and Pensions; and
c. European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development – Department for
Environment Food and Rural Affairs (Rural Payments Agency is the delivery
body).
2. The information below describes the standard lifecycle of a project funded through
the European Structural and Investments Funds. It focuses principally on projects
supported by the European Regional Development Fund or the European Social
Fund, but most of the processes and stages described are similar for the European
Fund for Agricultural Development (Defra and the Rural Payments Agency will
publish documentation describing the detailed processes and arrangements for this
programme). 1
3. All interested parties (applicants, local partners, administrators) should have a
broad knowledge of the process, understand what they need to do at each stage
and be aware of the expectations and potential pitfalls. Further information will be
added over time and greater detail about each aspect is contained in the documents
published on the GOV.UK website.
4. It also describes the differences between a Managing Authority call and the process
for delivery through European Social Fund co-financing organisations. Other
1 European Commission regulations refer to an ‘operation’ to describe a funded activity. In this document we
use the term ‘project’ even where it is technically accurate to refer to this activity as an ‘operation’ as the term
project is generally understood.
3
<<<PDF_PAGE_4>>>
differences that will exist for certain initiatives - Financial Instruments; Sustainable
Urban Development; and Community Led Local Development - will be added later.
5. The Greater London Authority is the Intermediate Body managing the programmes
in London on behalf of the Managing Authority. The Greater London Authority will
follow the same business process.
6. There is a standard lifecycle for European Regional Development Fund and
European Social Funds projects.
1. Routes in to the programme: The standard route into the programme will be
through a Managing Authority open call for applications. For some European
Social Fund activity, the route in will be through an application from a co-
financing organisation, which will then competitively select delivery
organisations;
2. Application: This involves the applicant submitting an Outline Application and
then, if that is successful, a Full Application. The Managing Authority carries
out an Assessment of the Outline Application and an Appraisal of the Full
Application. If the application is successful at both stages, this leads to a
Funding Agreement which specifies the terms of the funding;
3. Contract management: This involves the grant beneficiary (the successful
applicant) implementing the project activity compliant with ESIF requirements,
submitting claims to the Managing Authority for reimbursement, and filing
reports on activity and achievements, and ensuring that there is a clear audit
trail for all eligible activities. The Managing Authority will monitor the activity
through checking claims, and conducting on-the-spot monitoring visits to
ensure that all the expenditure is eligible within the rules of the European
Structural and Investment Funds; and
4. Closure: The grant beneficiary completes the activity and all financial claims
within the agreed period. The Managing Authority conducts checks that the
activity has closed and all the records are accurate and in place, as audits can
continue to take place for many years.
4
<<<PDF_PAGE_5>>>
The diagram below shows the high level process.
5
<<<PDF_PAGE_6>>>
Routes into the programme
5. In line with the high level European Structural and Investment Funds business
process, there are two main routes into the programmes:
a. Via a Managing Authority ‘call’ published on the GOV.UK website. A call is
an open invitation for applicants to submit project proposals against a
published specification; or
b. Via a Co-financing Organisation (CFOs) (also called ‘Opt-ins’). CFOs are
organisations selected by the European Social Fund Managing Authority that
contribute match funding and deliver European Social Fund activity through
others. Once they have a Funding Agreement with the Managing Authority,
they will run an invitation to tender/call process to competitively select
providers.
6. In time there may be slightly different routes into the programme for some other
initiatives like, Financial Instruments, Community Led Local Development or
Sustainable Urban Development.
6
<<<PDF_PAGE_7>>>
Open calls
7. Applicants are invited to submit applications in response to a call. Calls are
designed to bring forward a range of ideas and innovative solutions, as well as
helping to ensure that the process for selecting grant recipients is open,
transparent and consistent.
8. Calls for applications will be published at regular intervals through the lifetime of
the programme. Calls will often specify the local growth priorities in a geographic
area within the context of the Operational Programme. The Local Enterprise
Partnership area European Structural and Investment Funds Sub-Committee
representing local partners will contribute intelligence about local strategic growth
needs and the Managing Authorities will use this information to draft calls that meet
both the local needs and the requirements of the Operational Programme.
9. The call might:
 Be quite broad and open or more specific and defined to meet a particular local
need or opportunity or define a geographic area in which the project or the
beneficiaries should be based;
 Specify a minimum or maximum size of project – in terms of financial value or
contribution to outputs or results;
 Define the duration of the project; and
 Describe the timescale for the process – e.g. closing dates.
10. Applicants need to make sure that their application meets the call specification and
is written in the context of the Operational Programme. The main potential
variables within calls are described below:
Budgets
11. The call may include a defined budget allocation, an indicative range or an
unspecified budget. Normally an indicative range will be provided.
12. Running European funded projects involves a certain degree of administration and
there are often economies of scale to be gained from larger investments which also
7
<<<PDF_PAGE_8>>>
have been shown to have more strategic impact in the local economy. The
Managing Authorities may set minimum thresholds for calls.
13. Applicants need to provide match funding, in other words the applicant must
supplement the grant from the fund with other public or private money. The
percentage of European Structural and Investment Funds contribution is normally
50% (intervention rate) but this depends on various factors like the funding gap, the
added value of the funding and the category of region.
Duration and frequency
14. Calls may be open:
 For long periods, with projects assessed as they are submitted (‘rolling’ calls);
 For a long period, but with fixed assessment points and projects assessed in
batches; or
 For defined periods, with all projects assessed at the close of the call.
Geography
15. One of the benefits of a national programme is that an activity can provide benefits
to a large group of beneficiaries irrespective of their location as long as it is in
England. At the same time the programme is designed to have maximum impact at
a local level. As a result, the Managing Authority will work with local partners and
many calls will specify the geographic location of the activity. A few principles
apply:
 Beneficiaries should not be restricted in terms of where they take up provision;
and
 Projects should not be restricted geographically in terms of where or to whom
they provide support.
8
<<<PDF_PAGE_9>>>
Category of Region
16. The European Union has specified categories of region based on indices of
deprivation. 2There are three categories of region based on Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) per capita compared with the average GDP of the EU-27:
a. More developed (GDP per capita is above 90%): This covers most of
England. The intervention rate is 50%;
b. Transition regions (GDP per capita between 75% and 90%): There are nine
of these in England: Cumbria, Tees Valley and Durham, Lancashire,
Lincolnshire, East Yorkshire and North Lincolnshire, Shropshire and
Staffordshire, Merseyside, South Yorkshire and Devon. The intervention rate
is 60%; and
c. Less developed regions (GDP per capita less than 75%): Cornwall and the
Isles of Scilly is the only such region in England. This means that the EC will
contribute a larger fraction of spend (the “intervention rate”): up to 80%.
17. The map below shows Local Enterprise Partnership areas and the related category
of region. More detailed information on Local Enterprise Partnerships can be found
on the LEP Network website.
2 The classification of regions under one of the three categories of regions shall be determined on the basis of how the GDP per capita
of each region, measured in purchasing power parities (PPS) and calculated on the basis of Union figures for the period 2007 - 2009,
relates to the average GDP of the EU-27 for the same reference period.
9
<<<PDF_PAGE_10>>>
10
<<<PDF_PAGE_11>>>
18. The European Commission views each category of region as being a programme
area of its own. As a result costs and outputs need to be forecast and then tracked
against the relevant category of region. (See guidance in the Eligibility Rules) The
defining factor for European Regional Development Fund applications is the
location of the end-beneficiary receiving the support. For European Social Fund it
is where the training takes place. This has a few implications:
a. The application should anticipate the location of activities in terms of
categories of region; and
b. Claims, contract management and verifications should take account of
category of region and applicants should use their best efforts to forecast the
likely flow across categories of region the project may cover.
Publication of calls
19. Calls will be published on our Funding Finder. The Funding Finder can be located
here.
11
<<<PDF_PAGE_12>>>
Entry via Co-financing Organisations
20. European Social Fund Co-financing Organisations (CFO), also known as Opt-in
Organisations provide the required eligible match funding and use their expertise to
procure, or grant fund and contract manage European Social Fund. More
information on who they are and how to access funding through them can found on
the Partner Information page.
12
<<<PDF_PAGE_13>>>
The Application process
21. There is a two stage process for applying for funding following an open call –
Outline Application and Full Application.
How do you apply?
22. Applications for grant funding from the European Structural and Investment Funds
may only be submitted in response to a published call for proposals issued by the
Managing Authorities. (See earlier note on the process and the exceptions)
23. Further details on how to submit an application and links to relevant guidance can
be found on each call page published on the Funding Finder.
24. While the process is broadly similar for the European Agricultural Fund for Rural
Development Programme, detailed arrangements for submitting applications differ
slightly. All necessary information and guidance for applicants is available on the
Funding Finder.
25. The main route for securing funding in the 2014 to 2020 European Structural and
Investment Funds Growth programme is as follows.
i. An applicant submits an Outline Application through E-CLAIMS – the on-line
management information system that will support the whole programme. The
applicant will need to take into account all the relevant rules and guidance in
developing their proposal. The application documentation provides detailed
guidance to the applicant about what to take into account in developing and
application. Note: E-CLAIMS is still under development. In the interim
applicants will submit an application on the Word template available from
the GOV.UK website and emailed to the email address on the published
call;
ii. The Managing Authority will assess the Outline Application to see if it fits the
main requirements of the Operational Programme and the relevant call. An initial
Gateway Assessment will involve a high-level view about whether it meets the
basic requirements as an eligible organisation proposing eligible activity that
contributes to the priorities in the Operational Programme. Ineligible applications
will be rejected at this stage. The Managing Authority will then assess the
Outline Application and take advice from technical specialists where appropriate.
The Local Enterprise Partnership area European Structural and Investment
Funds Sub-Committee will provide advice on whether or not there is strategic fit
with the needs and opportunities at a local level. The committee will understand
13
<<<PDF_PAGE_14>>>
local economic growth conditions and opportunities, within the context of both
the Operational Programmes and the local European Structural Investment
Funds Strategy. This means that some of the content of the application form will
be shared with committee members. Where a call is over-subscribed, this
discussion will also contribute to any prioritisation of applications;
iii. Due Diligence checks will be undertaken on private sector (including voluntary
and community sector) organisations which have submitted Outline Applications
and have satisfied the Outline Assessment and been selected to go forward to
Full Application stage. Due diligence will also include confirmation of the small
amend medium enterprises status of applicants where the assessor deems this
relevant. Universities, higher and further education institutions which may define
themselves as private sector, are exempt;
iv. If the proposal meets the requirements, the Managing Authority may invite the
applicant to prepare a Full Application. Where invited to do so, the applicant
prepares a Full Application;
v. The applicant will normally be expected to submit a Full Application within three
months of being invited to prepare such an application. The Full Application
requires more detail about the proposal the outputs, costs and anticipated
outcome. It is important to get this detail correct as the Full Application
constitutes part of the final funding agreement;
vi. The Managing Authority appraises the Full Application, drawing on advice and
expertise as described above;
vii. If the application meets the requirements and offers the best option for the
needs of the local area and Operational Programme, the Managing Authority
will issue a funding agreement which sets out the terms of the grant; and
viii. Both parties sign the funding agreement and the activity may start. Eligible
expenditure incurred can then be reclaimed from the Managing Authority.
Exceptions to this process
26. There are a number of exceptions to this standard call process. The co-financing
route mentioned earlier has a number of key differences.
14
<<<PDF_PAGE_15>>>
Key delivery differences for European Social Fund ‘Opt-In Process’ compared
to the European Structural and Investment Funds ‘calls process’
27. Since the Opt-In organisations are the “operation” in European Social Fund terms,
the fundamental principles and the core business process are the same to the
‘calls process’.
28. The key differences in the Opt-in arrangements relate to the fact that Opt-In
organisations deliver European Social Fund activity through others. Once they
have a Funding Agreement with the Managing Authority, they will run an invitation
to tender / call process to appoint providers. Opt-ins are responsible for ensuring
that these arrangements are compliant with the regulations and enable them to
deliver the commitments in the Funding Agreement.
29. The key differences in governance and delivery through Opt-In organisations
are:
 Opt-In organisations go through a selection process for Co-financing first,
before their status is approved by the Managing Authority;
 Active engagement between Local Partners and Opt-In organisations to support
development of local priorities and scale/scope of Opt-In provision;
 Local Enterprise Partnership area partners may have an agreement with each
Opt-In organisation, which sets out ways of working, including involvement in
specification or project outline development;
 To reach Funding Agreement, Opt-In organisations follow a 1-stage Managing
Authority grant funding application process, rather than a 2-stage (no
outline test required); and
 The timetable for implementation is slightly different as Opt-In organisations
only launch their Invitation to Tender/Project Outline post Funding Agreement.
15
<<<PDF_PAGE_16>>>
The National Offender Management Service (NOMS) is slightly different in that it will
continue to receive a national allocation of European Social Fund funding. As a European
Social Fund Co-financing organisation, NOMS uses European Social Fund to fund
activities that support the reintegration of prisoners back into the workforce.
Other exceptions to this process
30. In London the Greater London Authority undertakes the functions of the Managing
Authority.
31. Some activities (e.g. Community Led Local Development; Financial Instruments;
European Social Fund Opt-in projects, and some activities in Core Cities linked to
Sustainable Urban Development) will follow the same general process, but will
have slight variations due to the nature of these initiatives.
16
<<<PDF_PAGE_17>>>
Selection criteria and assessment and
appraisal process
Outline Applications
32. The purpose of the Outline Application stage is to prevent an applicant from
wasting unnecessary time developing a detailed application when some of the
fundamental criteria for selection are not met.
Assessment of Outline Applications against the selection criteria
33. The Managing Authority’s assessment of the Outline Application has two elements:
a) An initial gateway criteria assessment; followed by
b) An assessment against the core selection criteria, including a scoring
methodology for European Social Fund oversubscribed calls.
Gateway criteria
34. These are the minimum requirements which must be met in order that any
application is considered for funding support. They will be used when the Outline
Application is first submitted. The applicant/application must demonstrate that:
1. They are eligible to apply;
2. The proposed project involves eligible activity; and
3. It meets the priorities set out in the call and the Operational Programme.
35. As well as meeting national criteria, the applicant must make sure their proposed
project is eligible with relevant European regulations and national Eligibility Rules.
36. Once the Managing Authority is satisfied that the application has met the gateway
criteria, the application will be assessed against the core selection criteria.
17
<<<PDF_PAGE_18>>>
Core selection criteria
37. The European Regional Development Fund and European Social Fund Managing
Authorities will use a qualitative approach in assessing against the selection
criteria.
38. The European Social Fund Managing Authority will also use a quantitative
approach.
39. The criteria are:
 Strategic fit;
 Value for money;
 Management and control;
 Deliverability;
 Compliance; and
o Procurement
o State Aid
o Publicity
 Cross cutting themes
o Gender equality and non-discrimination
o Sustainable Development
40. The core selection criteria are the same at both Outline and Full Application stages,
but more detail and evidence is required at the Full Application stage. As part of the
assessment and appraisal process a score may be awarded for each Core
Selection Criteria. Further information on how the Managing authorities will apply
the selection criteria and ESF scoring methodology are provided in separate
guidance notes.
18
<<<PDF_PAGE_19>>>
Moving to Full Application
41. Once an application has been assessed at Outline Application and it is clear that
the proposal delivers both the Operational Programme requirements and relevant
local development needs and the taking account of the funds available, the
applicant may be invited to prepare a Full Application. In this invitation, the
Managing Authority will also notify applicants of any conditions or
recommendations made at the Outline Assessment stage and the deadline for
submitting the Full application, which will normally be in line with the published call
criteria.
42. It is anticipated that the Full Application will build on the detail from the Outline
Application. As it has already been assessed for the gateway criteria and local
strategic fit, the proposal should not normally change materially in its nature or
scope between this Outline and Full Application stage. The areas likely to need
significant work by the applicant include: details about the delivery approach,
activities and outputs, cost assumptions, procurement processes, target
methodologies and State Aid treatment.
43. The Managing Authority will also notify applicants whose applications have not
been selected to move to the Full Application stage.
44. Full Applications should also be submitted on E-CLAIMS. Note: E-CLAIMS is still
under development. In the interim applicants will submit an application on
the Word template available from the GOV.UK website and emailed to the
email address specified in the invitation letter.
Preparing the Full Application
45. Once an applicant has been invited to submit a Full Application, the Managing
Authority will appoint an appraiser for the application. This appraiser will be the
primary point of contact between the applicant and the Managing Authority and will
point them in the direction of any appropriate guidance or support. The Managing
Authority appraiser will arrange a debrief discussion with the applicant to explain
any conditions for the Full Application and explain any other relevant points from
the outline stage informing applicants of areas of weakness and where further
clarity is required. This may include technical queries on areas such as eligibility,
procurement, state aid or budget.
46. It is the responsibility of the applicant to develop the application. They may wish to
take independent advice or bring in technical expertise in developing their
application. The Managing Authority will not support the applicant in explaining how
19
<<<PDF_PAGE_20>>>
it should structure or prepare their application but will signpost applicants to
potential sources of advice as queries arise.
47. The Managing Authority may set a time to receive a draft Full Application in
advance of formal submission and provide some feedback to the applicant on this.
Applicants will be notified if this is the case..
48. The applicant is responsible for developing the proposal and submitting the Full
application by the agreed deadline via E-CLAIMS. Note: E-CLAIMS is still under
development. In the interim applicants will submit an application on the Word
template available from the GOV.UK website and emailed to the email
address on the published call.
Timescales for submitting a Full Application
49. Applicants will be set a deadline for the submission of the Full Application by the
Managing Authority. If there are exceptional reasons why an applicant is unable to
meet the deadline, the Managing Authority may, at its discretion, extend the
deadline. If an applicant fails to submit an application by an agreed deadline
without justification or is unresponsive, the Managing Authority will inform the
applicant that their application has been withdrawn.
The Managing Authorities’ appraisal of the Full Application
50. An appraisal is a technical assessment of the Full Application against the selection
criteria to ensure that the proposal is deliverable, complies with European Union
regulations and other applicable law, complies with the Operational Programme,
and is sufficiently well-defined to enter into a funding agreement and meet
programme audit requirements within the funds available.
51. After the Full Application has been submitted, the Managing Authority will
commence its technical appraisal against the same selection criteria as that of the
outline stage. The Managing Authority will not re-appraise applications that are not
strong enough and if this is the case, the applicant will have to submit the
application under an appropriate future call.
52. The Full Application proposal should not materially change from the successful
Outline Application. Should the Managing Authority consider something has
changed significantly from the outline stage, the Managing Authority will make an
assessment as to whether it is appropriate to allow the application to proceed or
whether to inform the applicant that the application is no longer satisfactory. This
20
<<<PDF_PAGE_21>>>
includes significant changes in the outputs and results the project will deliver. This
becomes particularly important where a proposal has come through a competitive
call and been prioritised against other proposals at the Outline Assessment stage.
If, in order to get through the Outline Application stage, the Managing Authority
suggested conditions that needed to be fulfilled by the applicant, the Full
Application and appraisal will reflect how the conditions have been taken into
account. In all these circumstances, the Managing Authority will make an
assessment about how to proceed as described above.
53. The Local Enterprise Partnership area European Structural and Investment Funds
Sub-Committee will provide advice on local economic growth conditions and
opportunities within the context of Operational Programmes and the local European
Structural Investment Funds Strategy to aid the Managing Authority’s assessment
at Outline and Full Application stage. The Managing Authority will draw in other
expertise and apply a scoring methodology as required. (e.g. Lawyers,
procurement practitioners, Quantity Surveyors, Other Government Departments).
54. The applicant will have the opportunity within the application to highlight any
commercially sensitive data which it feels should be withheld from partners or other
interested parties. The Managing Authority will have regard to the Freedom of
Information requirements.
Funding agreement
55. The funding agreement is the formal agreement between the Managing Authority
and the applicant. It is a legally binding agreement and it sets out the terms of the
grant.
56. The Managing Authority will write to successful applicants notifying them of its
decision to accept or reject an application and any proposed conditions of
investment. The Managing Authority will work through the terms and any
conditions which must be discharged prior to entering into the funding agreement
with the applicant. It should be noted that a positive decision at this stage is not a
guarantee of funding. It can take time for the conditions to be discharged before
the funding agreement can be signed.
57. When the Managing Authority is able to issue the funding agreement, it will send
two unsigned copies to the applicant. The applicant will sign and return both
copies for counter-signature by the Managing Authority and one copy will be sent
back to the applicant. Only when both parties have signed the funding agreement
will the project commence and the grant recipient may start to incur expenditure.
21
<<<PDF_PAGE_22>>>
Contract management
58. This signing and acceptance of a Funding Agreement marks the start of the
Contract Management process. After this point the Applicant is referred to as the
Grant Recipient. Once a Full Application has been appraised and been selected by
the Managing Authority to move towards a Funding Agreement, the Managing
Authority will appoint a contract manager.
59. This contract manager will be responsible for ensuring that the pre-funding
agreement conditions are discharged prior to entering into a legally binding
Funding Agreement with the Grant Recipient. If this results in a change to any
aspect of the Full Application (e.g. financial profile, project activity, agreed targets)
the contract manager will maintain an audit trail to explain any discrepancy
between the Full Application and the figures in the Funding Agreement.
Discharging pre-Funding Agreement conditions should be a relatively quick
process with the intention to move towards a live project status as soon as
possible. However, there are some instances where there can be lengthy
discussions or processes required in order to satisfactorily discharge these
conditions. This could result in substantial delays to the start of the project. The
Managing Authority will set a deadline for discharging these conditions - normally
three months. If the deadline is missed, the Managing Authority reserves the right
to withdraw the offer of European Structural and Investment Funds funding; the
Local Enterprise Partnership area European Structural and Investment Funds Sub-
Committee will be kept informed of any such instances.
60. Once the Funding Agreement is signed the Managing Authority will continue to
work with the Grant Recipient. This relationship is critical to the success of the
project both for compliance and delivering maximum economic and social impact.
The approach to contract management will vary with the frequency and intensity of
contact with the grant recipient negotiated depending on the complexity of the
activity, the size of the grant and the experience and capacity of the organisation.
The Managing Authority will expect to have a progress visit or conversation at most
quarterly and at least annually.
61. The Managing Authorities for European Regional Development Fund and
European Social Fund will work cooperatively to provide a joined up service to
partners and grant recipients. The different funds need a clear audit trail back to
the individual fund, with separate Funding Agreements and separate claims and
reporting. Where an project is receiving monies from more than one structural fund,
the Managing Authorities will agree a lead contract manager who will be the
“relationship manager” with the Grant Recipient and who will then liaise with
22
<<<PDF_PAGE_23>>>
colleagues across the appropriate managing authorities. In general, unless a
particular specialism is needed, the relationship manager will be from the
Managing Authority contributing the largest share of the funding to an project.
62. Where the activity covers more than one Local Enterprise Partnership area, or the
applicant is the recipient of a number of different grants in different Local Enterprise
Partnership areas, the Managing Authority will aim to appoint one contract
manager so that there is a single point of contact.
63. Grant Recipients may submit Project Change Requests throughout the life of the
project and the Managing Authority will review all such requests prior to deciding
whether or not to approve them. Where a change request impacts on; the level of
funding, the objectives or the targets that an project is seeking, or looking to
achieve, depending on the scale, it may be referred back to the Local Enterprise
Partnership area European Structural and Investment Funds Sub-Committee for
their advice. There is no automatic right for a Change Request to be approved –
the final decision rests with the Managing Authority.
64. The Managing Authority may also instigate a Project Change Request, for example
where performance or expenditure falls significantly below forecast profiles.
Contract management process
65. There are a number of different parts of the contract management process –
contract management, submission and payment of claims, monitoring and
verification, and audit. The purpose is to make sure that the grant recipient is
delivering the activity, making claims, achieving outputs and making the required
progress to deliver the desired outcome. The Managing Authority will not manage
the project but is focussed primarily on compliance, with the aim to identify any
problems as early as possible and ensuring the economic outcomes are achieved.
The later problems are uncovered the more work it creates for everyone.
66. Every project will be risk rated and this risk rating will influence the frequency and
intensity of the compliance checks. The risk rating will be reviewed regularly
through the process.
23
<<<PDF_PAGE_24>>>
Project Inception Visit
67. The purpose of the Project Inception Visit (PIV) is to test the preparedness of the
Grant Recipient to manage the project in a way that is compliant with EUROPEAN
Structural and Investment Funds requirements and to give the Grant Recipient an
opportunity to seek clarification on any issues. The PIV is for the benefit of both the
Managing Authority and the Grant Recipient and should ideally include the
operational staff delivering the project. The visit should take place as soon as
possible after the Funding Agreement has been signed. This would normally take
place within 3 months. Following the PIV meeting, the contract manager will agree
the regularity of subsequent progress meetings.
68. Most projects receiving European Agricultural Funds for Rural Development
funding will also have a PIV depending on the amount of grant offered and the
complexity of the project.
24
<<<PDF_PAGE_25>>>
Claims
69. European Structural and Investment Funds is generally paid in arrears, the
exception being some investment capital is paid in advance for Financial
Instruments. The whole process will be managed electronically through E-CLAIMS.
70. The Managing Authority will specify the claims period. This will normally be
quarterly but in some circumstances could be monthly. The Grant Recipient will
forecast their claims over the lifetime of the project. It is important that the profile is
a reasonably accurate reflection of forecast claims as this will be used to monitor
performance of the project.
71. The grant recipient will then submit claims to the Managing Authority. This claim
will be checked by the Managing Authority. The claims checker will identify a
sample of the claim transactions and undertake a more rigorous assessment of
these transactions. This will require the grant recipient to provide additional
evidence.
72. If problems are identified the Contract Manager will work with the grant recipient to
correct the issue. If the claim has to be returned, the grant recipient would amend
and resubmit an amended version of the claim.
73. Once cleared, the approved payment will be submitted to the Managing Authority
finance team for payment to the Grant Recipient.
74. With each claim, the Grant Recipient will also be required to provide additional
information about the progress of the activity, variation from forecast expenditure
and outputs, report on outputs and/or results achieved, state aid and any changes
to the activity including information on any new procurements. This is part of the
progress monitoring of the activity.
75. European Agricultural Funds for Rural Development funding is also paid in arrears.
The number of claims to be submitted by the grant recipient will depend on the
nature and scale of the project.
25
<<<PDF_PAGE_26>>>
On-the-spot verification visit
76. All projects will be randomly sampled for on-the-spot verification visits. A member
of the verification team (not the contract manager) will conduct an in-depth on-site
visit to check expenditure and compliance with contractual conditions. The sample
will be drawn from the forecast claims and then will test some of the most recent
claims.
77. For the European Regional Development Fund, all projects will receive an on-the-
spot visit at least once on their lifetime and many projects will receive a visit
annually. The frequency of on-the-spot visits will be determined by the risk rating of
projects.
78. For co-financing organisations the sample of projects to be visited will be drawn
from the latest claim.
79. Projects supported through European Agricultural Funds for Rural Development
will receive a once in a lifetime on-the-spot inspection normally prior to payment of
the final claim. These inspections are conducted by the Rural Payment Agency’s
Rural Development Team on behalf of the Managing Authority.
26
<<<PDF_PAGE_27>>>
Monitoring and audit regime
80. As stated before, all projects are subject to extensive audit. The earlier any
problems are detected the better. It is relatively easy to correct and resolve issues
early but once these have been detected in the audit process it becomes much
more complicated. There are different levels of scrutiny and the impact increases at
each level.
a. The Grant Recipient is required to have strong controls and own up to any
financial errors in their projects. The Managing Authority should be notified of
any financial or compliance errors identified by the grant recipient through
submission of the self-declared adjustment form;
b. Management Controls (Claims Checks) – The Managing Authority will
sample claims and test that the underlying evidence demonstrates that the
expenditure is regular;
c. Management Controls (On-the-Spot verification visits) – The Managing
Authority conducts in-depth checks on selected claims;
d. Assurance Checks – The Certifying Authority conducts a sample of checks
on expenditure before submitting claims to the European Commission for
reimbursement;
e. Audit Authority (Project audits) – The Audit Authority (An independent body -
Government Internal Audit Agency) conducts audits of projects based on a
sampling methodology;
f. Audit Authority (Systems Audits) – The Audit Authority conducts audits of the
functioning of the whole system. Based on these two sets of audits, they
report to the European Commission following defined rules. This Annual
Control Report states an error rate for the functioning of the whole
programme. The European Commission deems an error rate of over 2% to
reveal weaknesses in the system which can result in loss of grant to the
programme;
g. European Commission Audit – The European Commission has the right to
audit operations and systems (including Audit Authority) at any stage in order
to gain assurance about the functioning of the control system; and
h. European Court of Auditors – The European Court of Auditors auditing the
functioning of the system (including EC Audit) across the whole of the
European Union. They might select to visit an operation.
27
<<<PDF_PAGE_28>>>
81. In all these processes, the verification and audit is independent of the contract
manager, but the contract manager plays an important role in preparing the Grant
Recipient for these visits, understanding the expectations and following up actions
arising. The likelihood of these audits being incident free is significantly increased
where the grant recipient has actively engaged with the contract manager,
submitted regular detailed claims and worked with the contract manager to identify
potential errors before they have occurred rather than trying to minimise the impact
after they have occurred. Establishing an environment where the Grant Recipient
feels able to share information freely, test ideas and initial thinking, and work
collaboratively with the Managing Authority is the fundamental basis for a compliant
and effective Programme.
82. Projects supported through European Agricultural Funds for Rural Development
will be subject to independent socio-economic inspections from the Rural Payment
Agency’s Inspectorate. These audits will be selected on a risk and random basis
annually covering at least 4% of the eligible expenditure declared to the European
Commission each year.
28
<<<PDF_PAGE_29>>>
Irregularities
83. The Managing Authority has an obligation to ensure that all of the expenditure it
claims from the European Commission is regular and in compliance with the
regulations governing European Structural and Investment Funds. In the event that
any irregular expenditure is identified within a project claim, either by the contract
manager or during any of the compliance checks or audit visits, the contract
manager will work with the grant recipient to try and resolve this where possible. If
it is not possible to resolve the issue the Managing Authority will instigate clawback
of the irregular grant by offsetting this amount against future claims, or by issuing a
demand note to the Grant Recipient.
What are irregularities?
84. Irregularities can arise from any expenditure that does not meet Eligibility Criteria,
European Union or National Law or Regulations.
85. They are issues discovered after payment of the claim by the Managing Authority,
Certifying Authority, Audit Authority, European Commission Auditors (DG
Regio/DG Emploi/DG Agri) or European Court of Auditors.
86. Once an irregularity has been identified it will be recorded – for a fixed financial
value or as a flat rate (percentage across all related expenditure – possibly
including past and future expenditure). The grant recipient will have an opportunity
to provide evidence to show that the expenditure is regular and if the Managing
Authority accepts this they will reject the irregularity.
87. If no evidence is provided or the evidence is not sufficient, the Managing Authority
will report the irregularity as concluded and start to recover the money from the
applicant, either as a deduction from future claims or through issue of a demand
note. This money is lost to the project forever.
Self-declared adjustments
88. Any issue detected by the grant recipient and notified to the Managing Authority
after payment of the claim but prior to detection or selection within an audit sample
by the Managing Authority, Certifying Authority, Audit Authority or European
Commission Auditors can be submitted as a self-declared adjustment. The grant
recipient should notify the Managing Authority immediately once they are aware of
an issue with an explanation about why the mistake has occurred. The Managing
Authority will assess this and if satisfied with the explanation, this will be recorded
as a self-declared adjustment. Although the ineligible expenditure will need to be
repaid, the project does not lose any grant in this circumstance.
29
<<<PDF_PAGE_30>>>
30
<<<PDF_PAGE_31>>>
Project closure
89. The final stage in the life cycle of an European Structural and Investment Funds
operation is project closure. The detail of this process will be published at a later
date but the key lessons learned is that if the project is tightly managed from the
beginning closure is relatively easy but if the management of the project is less well
managed more closure can be a significant burden and create costs for the grant
recipient.
Document retention
90. All projects are required to retain documents for a period after the activity has
ended and these should be kept in an acceptable format so that they can be
inspected by auditors. The grant recipient will be informed of this retention period at
the end of the project. The period is dependent on the date at which the final claim
is submitted to the Managing Authority so the retention period will be unique to
each project and this period cannot be specified at the outset.
91. The rule is that all documents must be retained for 2 years after the submission of
the annual accounts in which the final expenditure for the project is included. The
accounts are contained in the Annual Control Report which is submitted to the
Commission each year by the Audit Authority. The Audit Authority will be working
on a July to June year and will submit the Annual Control Report in the February of
the following year. The 2 year retention period will start from the 31 December of
the year in which the Annual Control Report is submitted that includes the final
payment from the Managing Authority to the grant recipient in respect of the
project.
92. Note that documents might have to be retained for longer periods if other
conditions apply which dictate a longer retention period, for example State Aid
Schemes, revenue generating activities, economic lifetime of an asset or other
accounting rules. Further guidance will be published in due course.
31