<<<PDF_PAGE_1>>>
European Structural and Investment Funds
Growth Programme for England (2014-2020)
Terms of Reference
for the
Growth Programme Board’s
Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP) Area
European Structural and Investment (ESI)
Funds Sub-committees
April 2022
LEP Area ESI Funds Sub-Committee TOR
ESIF-GN-2-003, Version 8
Date published 28 April 2022
<<<PDF_PAGE_2>>>
April 2022
Terms of Reference for the Growth Programme Board’s
Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP) Area
European Structural and Investment (ESI) Funds sub-committees
(European Structural and Investment Funds 2014 -2020)
The LEP Area ESI Funds sub-committee
1. The Terms of Reference for LEP area ESI Funds sub-committees are described in
the following sections:
A. Overview and governance context
B. Functions
C. Operating practice
D. Operating protocols
E. Membership
A. Overview and governance context
1. The 2014-2020 European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), European Social
Fund (ESF) and part of the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development
(EAFRD) Operational Programmes have been aligned in England in an ESI Funds
Growth Programme. The governance structure of the ESI Funds Growth
Programme has been established to exploit a multi-fund approach and ensure that
the strong territorial basis of EU Cohesion policy is implemented in a way that best
capitalises on national arrangements and local strengths.
2. A combined Programme Monitoring Committee (PMC), known as the Growth
Programme Board (GPB) has therefore been set up, to maximise the synergies
of the separate Funds in the ESI Funds Growth Programme. The GPB will be the
PMC for the England ERDF and ESF Operational Programmes and will provide
advice to the England PMC for the European Agricultural Fund for Rural
Development.
3. Where there are differences of detail in the arrangements or procedures for the
EAFRD Growth Programme, these will be spelled out separately by the
Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs (Defra) to LEP area ESI Funds
sub-committees with a rural interest.
4. The GPB will be supported by several thematic national policy and operational
sub-committees. Sitting underneath this structure, will be sub-committees in local
areas. These local sub-committees will be known as LEP area ESI Funds sub-
committees. The territory of each LEP area ESI Funds sub-committee will be
denoted by a geographic prefix, for example the ‘Humber LEP area ESI Funds
sub-committee’. In Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly, the LEP area ESI Funds sub-
committee will be known as the ‘Cornwall and Isles of Scilly ITI Board’.
LEP Area ESI Funds Sub-Committee TOR
ESIF-GN-2-003, Version 8
Date published 28 April 2022
<<<PDF_PAGE_3>>>
April 2022
5. In some areas, Combined Authorities have been designated as Intermediate Bodies
(IBs). Certain managing authority responsibilities have been devolved to IBs as
agreed in their Memorandums of Understanding (MOU). The MOUs remain in place
and are not changed by amendments to these Terms of Reference.
B. Functions of LEP area ESI Funds sub-committees
6. In order to maximise expenditure at the end of the programmes, local notional
allocations are no longer ringfenced. The role of LEP area ESI Funds sub-
committee to provide advice to the Managing Authorities with regards to ESI
Funds strategies, calls, and outline and full applications has been fulfilled.
7. Whilst this advisory role has now concluded, with local investment decisions having
been taken, the structures will remain in place to provide a line of communication
between local partners and the Managing Authorities regarding programme
progress in the respective LEP area.
C. Operating practice of the LEP area ESI Funds sub-committee
8. The Managing Authorities will provide each LEP area ESI Funds sub-committee
with biannual implementation reports in January and July that set out progress in its
area against Operational Programmes and ESI Funds Strategy specific objectives
and targets. These reports will be provided in an agreed format by programme. A
final report detailing the achievements of ESIF investments in its LEP area will be
provided to each LEP area ESI Funds sub-committee in July 2024.
9. In all its activities the role of LEP area ESI Funds sub-committees will not substitute
for or take on the tasks and functions of the Managing Authorities, Intermediate
Bodies including the Greater London Authority (GLA), or the GPB.
D. LEP area ESI Funds sub-committee operating protocols
10. Following the role of LEP area ESI Funds sub-committee in helping the Managing
Authorities reach full commitment they will no longer be required to formally meet
now their role to provide advice on investment decisions has been fulfilled.
11. LEP area ESI Funds sub-committees can continue to meet informally should they
wish to discuss local growth issues. Informal meetings will not be serviced by the
Secretariat or Managing Authorities.
12. Any questions or comments on the management information reports or programme
delivery should be addressed to the named contact at the relevant Managing
Authority.
The Secretariat
LEP Area ESI Funds Sub-Committee TOR
ESIF-GN-2-003, Version 8
Date published 28 April 2022
<<<PDF_PAGE_4>>>
April 2022
13. The Secretariat function will be provided by the Department of Levelling Up Housing
and Communities (DLUHC) Programme Delivery Team (PDT) in each LEP area on
behalf of the Managing Authorities.
14. The Secretariat will:
• Provide Management Information reports on behalf of the different Managing
Authorities in the agreed format.
• Support communication between the GPB and the LEP area ESI Funds sub-
committees via the GPB Secretariat.
15. Given the advisory role of the LEP area ESI Funds sub-committee has been
fulfilled there is no longer a need for the Secretariat to actively manage conflict of
interests. Members are asked, however, when forwarding questions or comments
on the management information reports or programme delivery, to declare conflicts
of interest if required and continue to abide by the Nolan Principles.
E. Membership
16. As we move into the next stage of programme delivery, the composition of the LEP
area ESI Funds sub-committee existing membership will be retained.
17. Where members leave, they may nominate a successor. Representatives to replace
departing members will not be actively sought by the Managing Authorities in the
subsequent stages of the programmes.
Subsequent amendments to these Terms of Reference will be discussed and agreed in
advance by the England ESI Funds Growth Programme Board
LEP Area ESI Funds Sub-Committee TOR
ESIF-GN-2-003, Version 8
Date published 28 April 2022