<<<PDF_PAGE_1>>>
Levelling Up Fund
Technical Note – UK wide
May 2021
1
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_2>>>
1 Introduction
1.1 This document sets out further guidance on eligibility, MP support and the
application and assessment process for the first round of the Levelling Up Fund for
Great Britain (GB) and Northern Ireland (NI). It is designed to support bidding
authorities to complete the LUF application form by the deadline of 12.00 noon
on 18 June. Applications received after that deadline will not be considered.
This guidance should be read alongside the Levelling Up Fund Application form and
the Levelling Up Fund Prospectus and which sets out the objectives of the Fund and
how it will be delivered.
1.2 The Levelling Up Fund is a capital only fund, administered by the Ministry of
Housing, Communities and Local Government (MHCLG), Department for Transport
(DfT) and HM Treasury (HMT). References to the ‘Secretary of State’ are to the
Secretary of State for Housing, Communities and Local Government, Secretary of
State for Transport and the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
1.3 Bidding authorities should note that we will publish FAQs in April, and further
guidance later in the Spring. This will include guidance on delivery assurance and
governance, monitoring and data requirements and the national evaluation
approach. Government may also update or amend the technical requirements and
guidance from time to time and lead entities must ensure they are using the most up
to date versions of all documents which will be available on gov.uk
2
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_3>>>
2 Contents
Section Page reference
Section 3: Timetable Page 3
Section 4: Communicating with HMG Page 4
Section 5: Subsidy Control, State Aid and compliance with Page 4
UK legislation
The Levelling Up Fund Process in Great Britain
Section 6: Role of MPs in bidding Page 5
Section 7: Eligibility Page 5-6
Section 8: Capacity Funding Page 6
Section 9: Preparing and Submitting LUF Bids Page 6-7
Section 10: LUF assessment and decision making Page 7 - 12
The Levelling Up Fund Process in Northern Ireland
Section 11: Eligibility Page 13
Section 12: Capacity Funding Page 13
Section 13: Preparing and Submitting LUF Bids Page 13 – 14
Section 14: LUF assessment and decision making Page 14 - 15
Annexes
Annex A: Glossary Page 16
Annex B: Table of interventions Page 17 - 19
Annex C: Further value for money guidance Page 20 - 21
Annex D: Large transport scheme checklist Page 22 - 29
3 Timetable
When Activity
March 2021 Webinars conducted by UKG officials to clarify the policy,
application process and assessment.
14 April 2021 Deadline for places to submit their questions to
levellingupfund@communities.gov.uk
April 2021 FAQs Published on
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/levelling-up-fund-
additional-documents
12.00 noon18 Bidding entities submit bids to MHCLG -
June 2021 levellingupfund@communities.gov.uk
June – Autumn Bid assessment by MHCLG and DfT
Autumn Decision making and announcements
3
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_4>>>
4 How do you communicate with us?
4.1 Applications should be sent to the Levelling Up Fund inbox
levellingupfund@communities.gov.uk by 12.00 noon on 18 June. Bidders are also
invited to send any questions to that same inbox by no later than 14 April. FAQs will
be published later in April 2021. Webinars will also be held on 29 and 30 March.
5 Subsidy Control, State Aid and compliance with UK legislation
5.1 If the Levelling Up Fund is used to provide a subsidy, expenditure must be compliant
with the UK’s obligations on subsidy control.
5.2 All bids that may be considered subsidy must consider how they will deliver in line
with subsidy control (or State Aid for aid in scope of the Northern Ireland Protocol) as
per UK Government guidance - which can be found
here: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/complying-with-the-uks-
international-obligations-on-subsidy-control-guidance-for-public-authorities
5.3 Bids supported by the Levelling Up Fund must comply with all relevant UK
legislation.
4
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_5>>>
The Levelling Up Fund Process in Great Britain
6 Role of MPs in bidding
6.1 The Government recognises the important role of Members of Parliament in
championing the interests of their constituents. We expect bidding authorities to
consult local Members of Parliament as they develop the bid. MPs can play a
positive role in prioritising bids and helping broker local consensus. Support and
engagement from local stakeholders and local MPs will be considered as part of the
strategic fit assessment of bids (see assessment framework below) but is only one
part of a wider assessment and is not a necessary condition for a successful bid.
6.2 MPs have the option of providing formal written support for one bid which they see
as a priority. The lead authority must submit that letter of priority support along with
their application. A bid may have priority support from multiple MPs and local
stakeholders.
6.3 In addition to formally backing one bid, MPs may also want to support any or all
schemes that would have a benefit to their constituencies as part of the wider
stakeholder input process. Individual MPs should not provide a letter offering their
priority support to more than one bid. We will not be able to consider formal priority
support in the assessment process if an MP offers this to more than one bid.
6.4 Information on the role of MPs in future bidding rounds will be confirmed after
funding has been announced for bids from the first funding round.
7 Eligibility
7.1 Unitary authorities (including metropolitan borough councils), London borough
councils and district councils in two tier areas in England; and unitary authorities in
Scotland and Wales are eligible to submit bids.
7.2 Local authorities will be able to submit a number of bids determined by the number
of parliamentary constituencies wholly within the local authority boundary and the
area’s agreement when constituencies cross more than one local authority:
• Local authorities can submit one bid for every MP whose constituency lies
wholly within their boundary.
• Where an MP’s constituency crosses more than one local authority, one local
authority must take responsibility as the lead bidder. Local areas should work
together and with the local MP to designate that lead bidder. Lead authorities
will receive an additional bid once they are designated as such
7.3 Underpinning this, every local authority will be able to submit at least one bid, even if
they do not have any constituencies wholly lying within their boundaries and are not
5
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_6>>>
the designated lead authority for constituencies crossing into multiple local
authorities.
Transport-only bids
7.4 In addition to the above, county councils with transport powers, combined
authorities, mayoral combined authorities and the Greater London Authority (GLA)
are eligible to submit one transport bid; and unitary authorities in Scotland and
Wales, and unitary authorities in England with transport powers are able to submit
one additional bid which also must be for transport. These transport-only bids are
allocated independently of constituency boundaries.
8 Capacity Funding
8.1 Capacity funding of £125,000 will be provided to eligible local authorities: the 93 local
authorities in England that fall into category 1 on the index of priority places
published alongside the prospectus; and all local authorities in Scotland and Wales.
This revenue funding will not be ringfenced and is expected to be used by bidders to
assist them to build capacity. Further information on how and when this funding will
be paid will be published in our FAQs.
9 Preparing and submitting LUF bids
9.1 Local Authorities are invited to submit one or more capital bids (by filling out the LUF
application form). A capital bid can be for an individual project or a package of up
to three projects, up to £20 million in value per bid, or in exceptional cases up to
£50m per bid for larger transport projects. Both individual and package bids can
contain proposals within a single theme, or across multiple themes, so long as they
form part of a coherent, consistent proposal. All bids must be submitted in full with
all supporting documentation, and where appropriate the approval of the
responsible authority to levellingupfund@communities.gov.uk by 12.00 noon 18
June 2021. Any bids or supporting documentation submitted after this
deadline will not be assessed or considered for funding. Any incomplete bids
will be assessed based on what has been submitted.
9.2 Package bids (those with two or three projects) must clearly explain how their
component elements are aligned with each other and represent a coherent set of
interventions. In this instance, they will be assessed together at the bid level rather
than as individual projects. This is for two reasons: firstly, to ensure competition
outcomes can be announced in the autumn to enable spend and delivery to get
underway in 2021/22; secondly because the fund has been designed in such a way
that LAs should be presenting a coherent set of bids. We therefore need to be able
to assess how packages of projects work together. If there are weaknesses in one
of the projects, places should be mindful that it will adversely impact on the
overall score of their bid.
6
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_7>>>
9.3 Bids will be accepted for larger transport schemes, by exception, such as
investments in the local road network. Such bids will need to be between £20 million
and £50 million and can be submitted by any bidding local authority (provided they
have the support of the authority with responsibility for transport).
9.4 The application form should be submitted by 18 June for all larger transport project
bids that are submitted for the first round of the Fund. It is expected that a more
detailed business case will need to be appraised before funding can be confirmed
for larger transport schemes. Therefore, DfT will assess the application form for
larger transport project bids and advise whether they should be developed further
and a more detailed business case should be prepared for review.
9.5 If available, a more detailed business case may be submitted for larger transport
project bids by 18 June in addition to the application form. The assessment of more
detailed business cases will occur at a later stage before funding can be confirmed
for larger transport project bids.
9.6 Please note that more detailed business cases for larger transport projects should
be in a transport business case format and be compliant with the Green Book’s five-
case model and the Department for Transport’s guidance on transport analysis
(TAG). More detailed business cases should include information requested in the
Application Form and more comprehensive plans and information for relevant
projects. A checklist of the relevant information and materials that should be
provided in more detailed business case submissions is at Annex D in the technical
note.
9.7 Eligible local authorities may wish to submit a joint bid, where two or more local
authorities are collaborating on a project or a package bid of up to 3 projects. This
may be appropriate where a project or projects cross administrative boundaries.
Joint bids will count towards the maximum number of bids that each local authority is
able to submit. Each local authority can submit a maximum of £20m (i.e. one bid’s
worth) of funding to a joint bid. For example, a joint bid from two local authorities
could request a maximum of £40m, and a joint bid from three local authorities could
request a maximum of £60m. A joint bid may not request more than £50m of
investment for any individual project. When assessing joint bids on the
“Characteristics of the Place” criterion we will reflect the index category that relates
to location of where the majority of the project or projects are delivered/ where most
funding is spent.
10 LUF assessment and decision-making
10.1 There will be a three staged approach to assessment and decision making.
10.2 Stage 1 Gateway: The first stage is a pass/fail gateway criterion, where bids will be
assessed against whether they can deliver some LUF expenditure in 2021/221. Bids
that do not meet this gateway criteria will not be assessed further and will not be
eligible to be considered for funding in this round.
1 Eligible expenditure in 2021-22 could include capital development costs
7
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_8>>>
10.3 Stage 2 Assessment and Shortlisting Bids: Bids will be assessed against the
criteria set out in the Prospectus to deliver a shortlist of the strongest bids. To create
a shortlist, applications will be assessed at the bid level against place characteristics,
strategic fit, deliverability and value for money. Table 1 below provides detailed
guidance on what places will be expected to demonstrate against strategic fit,
deliverability and value for money in their application form. These three criteria,
together with the place characteristics will carry equal weighting. The sub criteria in
Table 1 also carry an equal weighting. This only applies to assessing projects for the
shortlist – different weightings for these criteria may be applied when making final
funding decisions in line with the published wider considerations. As explained
above, places should note that where package bids are submitted, if one project is
particularly weak it will affect the overall bid score. A funding shortlist for GB will be
drawn up from those bids that score the highest overall, and who score at least
average or above on strategic fit, value for money and deliverability.
10.4 Stage 3 Decision Making: Once bid assessment and moderation has concluded,
and the shortlist is drawn up, Ministers will make funding decisions. In making these
decisions ministers may take account of some or all of these additional
considerations:
• Ensuring a reasonable thematic split of approved projects (e.g. across
regeneration and town centre, transport and culture and heritage);
• Ensuring a fair spread of approved projects across Great Britain;
• Ensuring a fair balance of approved projects across places in need;
• Prioritisation of either ‘strategic fit’ or ‘deliverability’ or ‘value for money’ over the
other criteria. The prioritisation and weighting at this stage may be different from
the weighting at assessment (noting this must be applied consistently to all
projects);
• Taking into account other investment in a local area. In future rounds, this could
include funding provided to local areas through the first round of this Fund.
10.5 We expect to announce the outcome of the competition by Autumn 2021
Table 1: Assessment Framework for shortlisting bids
Strategic Fit
Sub-Criteria Factors that will be taken into account
MP • You should explain whether any MP(s) have formally given the bid
Endorsement their priority support in this funding round, with a signed letter
included.
8
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_9>>>
Stakeholder There is an expectation of engagement with all relevant stakeholders.
Engagement The range of relevant stakeholders will vary and therefore there is no
and Support list of stakeholders for whom evidence of support must be provided
with the exception of where the local MP is supporting the bid as a
priority (see section below). Wider MP (non-priority MP support)
should be demonstrated here.
We are looking for applications that set out:
• what engagement has been done with local stakeholders and the
community
• How you have identified those stakeholders, and the efforts you
have made to reach those that might not normally engage
• The methods you have used, including innovative virtual methods
given the constraints of ongoing Covid-19 restrictions
• The extent to which this engagement has informed the bid.
• This should be evidenced, including links to any current/ ongoing
consultations, community forums, etc
• Where success of the bid is reliant on the cooperation and
supporto f stakeholders or the local community, that should be
made cleara nd evidenced in the response.
The case for We are looking for applications to set out a strong case for investment
investment and a realistic theory of change demonstrating:
• Evidence of the local challenges/barriers to growth and context that
the bid is seeking to respond. A clear explanation on what you are
proposing to invest in and why the proposed interventions in the bid
will address those challenges and barriers with evidence to support
that explanation. As part of this, we would expect to understand the
rationale for the location that the bid is focusing on. This will be
reviewed alongside how places have been categorised on the
Characteristics of Place Index
• For transport schemes this should be presented as an Options
Assessment Report (OAR).
• Set out what your planned outputs and outcomes are and how you
will deliver the outputs and confirms these results are likely to flow
from the interventions. Bidders may wish to refer to annex B, which
provides an illustrative summary of the outputs and outcome
indicators based on likely interventions that fall within the scope of
this fund
• An explanation on why Government investment is needed (what is
the market failure)
• Explain whether/ how other public and private funding will be
leveraged
9
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_10>>>
Alignment We are looking for applications that explain how the bid aligns to and
with the local supports:
and national
• relevant local strategies (such as Local Plans, local economic
context
strategies or Local Transport Plans) and local objectives for
investment, improving infrastructure, local economic development
and levelling up.
• UK Government policy objectives, legal and statutory commitments,
such as delivering Net Zero carbon emissions and improving air
quality. Bids for transport projects in particular should clearly
explain their carbon benefits.
• Other investments from different funding streams, such as (but not
limited to) the Towns Fund, Future High Streets Fund and
Transforming Cities Fund.
• The Government’s expectation is that all local road projects will
also deliver or improve cycling and walking infrastructure and
include bus priority measures (unless it can be shown that there is
little or no need to do so). Cycling elements of proposals should
follow the Government’s cycling design guidance which sets out
the standards required.
Value for Money
Criteria Factors that will be considered
Appropriaten The quality of data analysis and evidence for explaining the scale and
ess of data significance of local problems and issues including:
sources and • Quality of data analysis and evidence is sufficient to
evidence demonstrate the scale and significance of local problems and
issues.
• Data collection and survey methods are sufficient to ensure data
is robust and unbiased.
• Data is comprehensive in coverage, i.e. the area of interest.
Effectiveness Analysis and evidence on how the proposals will address existing or
of proposal in anticipated future problems. Quantifiable impacts should, where
addressing appropriate, usually be forecasted using a suitable model. Key factors
problems are:
• Robustness of the forecast assumptions, methodology and
model outputs
• Quality of the analysis or model (in terms of its accuracy and
functionality)
For non-transport measures, theory of change evidence should be
identified and referenced.
Economic Economic costs should be consistent with the costs in the financial
costs of case but adjusted for the economic case. Inflation should be included,
proposal fully explained and appropriate. The costs should be adjusted to an
appropriate price base year, including adjustment for risk and optimism
bias.
10
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_11>>>
Analysis of • The economic benefits of the proposal are properly measured.
monetised These should, where possible, be explained in terms of
costs and outcomes. For example, the economic case analysis for
benefits transport bids could estimate how they will reduce journey times,
support economic growth, support employment, or reduce
carbon emissions. For regeneration bids, direct and wider land
value uplift, amenity, air quality may be relevant.
• Explanation of how benefits and costs are analysed and
estimated, and of how this approach to the analysis is
proportionate for the proposal being considered.
Value for A summary of the overall value for money of the proposal.
money of • This should include reporting of Benefit Cost Ratios, with a
proposal methodology note. A template for capturing the BCR for non–
transport will be provided with the published FAQs.
• Other non-monetised impacts are properly assessed.
• A summary assessment of risks and uncertainties that could
affect the overall Value for Money.
Further details of requirements for Value for Money assessment are
provided in Annex C.
Deliverability
Criteria Factors that will be considered
Financial Provide details of:
• Costs and spend profile at the project and bid level. This should
also set out clearly what funding is secured from other sources and
major interdependencies where funding has not been secured
• Local and third-party contributions (a minimum local contribution of
10%) (local authority and/or third party) of the bid costs is
encouraged.
• Certainty over the whole funding package, including evidence of
any wider public or private sector co-funding commitments (i.e.
letters, contractual commitments). Identification of any gaps in
funding
• Information on margins and contingencies that have been allowed
for and the rationale.
• The main financial risks and how they will be mitigated, including
how cost overruns will be dealt with and shared between non-UKG
funding partners.
11
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_12>>>
Commercial Provide a robust procurement strategy which sets out the rationale for
the strategy selected and other options considered and discount. The
procurement route should also be set out with an explanation as to why
it is appropriate for a bid of the scale and nature submitted.
All procurements must be made in accordance with all relevant legal
requirements. Applicants must describe their approach to ensuring full
compliance in order to discharge their legal duties.
Management • A delivery plan which demonstrates:
o Clear milestones, key dependencies and interfaces, resource
requirements, task durations and contingency.
o An understanding of the roles and responsibilities, skills,
capability, or capacity needed.
o Arrangements for managing any delivery partners and the
plan for benefits realisation.
o Engagement of developers/ occupiers (where needed)
o The strategy for managing stakeholders and considering
their interests and influences.
o Confirmation of statutory approvals eg Planning permission
and details of information of ownership or agreements of
land/ assets needed to deliver the bid
o Please also list any powers / consents etc needed/ obtained,
details of date acquired, challenge period (if applicable) and
date of expiry of powers and conditions attached to them.
o The ability to spend some LUF in 2021/22
• A detailed risk assessment which sets out:
o the barriers and level of risk to the delivery of your bid.
o appropriate and effective arrangements for managing and
mitigating these risks
o a clear understanding on roles / responsibilities for risk
• Evidence of a track record and past experience of delivering
schemes of a similar scale and type.
Monitoring A proportionate monitoring and evaluation plan which sets out:
and
• Bid level M&E objectives and research questions
Evaluation
• Outline of bid level M&E approach
• Overview of key metrics for M&E (covering inputs, outputs,
outcomes and impacts), informed by bid objectives and Theory
of Change
• Resourcing and governance arrangements for bid level M&E
12
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_13>>>
The Levelling Up Fund Process in Northern Ireland
We are taking a different approach to delivering the Fund in Northern Ireland, which
reflects the different local government landscape compared to England, Scotland
and Wales.
11 Eligibility
11.1 Recognising the different local government landscape in Northern Ireland, different
organisations will be eligible to bid compared to Great Britain. The UK Government
will accept bids from a range of local applicants, including but not limited to
businesses, voluntary and community sector organisations, district councils, the
Northern Ireland Executive and other public sector bodies
11.2 For transport projects specifically, the Northern Ireland Executive holds many of the
relevant powers. Where they are the lead bidder they must engage with and secure
the support of the relevant district council for the area in which the bid is based, in
order to be considered for funding. Northern Ireland Executive Departments are not
eligible to bid for projects under the other two investment themes, where the lead
bidder should operate at a more local level. In all cases the lead bidder will need to
have the powers to deliver the projects that form part of their bid.
11.3 The role of MPs is also different in NI – they can express support for bids as part of
the wider stakeholder engagement process, but formal priority backing of MPs will
not be considered as part of bid assessment, unlike in GB.
11.4 As a wider range of organisations can apply to the fund in NI, we will expect bidders
to demonstrate through two additional gateway criteria that they have the capacity
and capability to deliver capital projects. See the section on assessment below.
12 Capacity Funding
12.1 In Northern Ireland, there will be a different approach to capacity funding based on
the funding landscape. This will see all district councils and some other identified
bidding entities receive capacity funding. Further details on capacity funding will be
picked up in an FAQ that will be published shortly.
13 Preparing and Submitting LUF Applications
13.1 As with bidding authorities in GB, places are invited to submit a capital bid (by filling
out the LUF application form) for an individual project or a package of projects,
up to £20 million in value. Bids for larger transport schemes will be considered by
exception. As with GB bids, NI bidders must submit their application in full with
all supporting documentation to levellingupfund@communities.gov.uk by 12.00
noon 18 June 2021. Any bids submitted after this deadline will not be
13
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_14>>>
assessed or considered for funding. Any incomplete bids will be assessed
based on what has been submitted.
13.2 Package bids (those with two or three projects) must clearly explain how their
component elements are aligned with each other and represent a coherent set of
interventions. In this instance, they will be assessed together at the bid level rather
than as individual projects. This is for two reasons: firstly, to ensure competition
outcomes can be announced in the autumn to enable spend and delivery to get
underway in 2021/22; secondly because the fund has been designed in such a way
that bidding entities should be presenting a coherent set of bids. We therefore need
to be able to assess how packages of projects work together. If there are
weaknesses in one of the projects, places should be mindful that it will
adversely impact on the overall score of their bid.
13.3 Bidding entities may wish to submit a joint bid, where two or more organisations are
collaborating on a project or a package bid of up to 3 projects.
14 LUF Assessment and Decision Making
14.1 LUF applications from NI organisations and authorities will also be assessed in a
three staged approach.
14.2 Stage 1 Gateway: The first stage is a pass/fail gateway criterion, where bids will be
assessed against whether they can delivery some LUF expenditure in 2021/222. In
NI, for feasibility reasons bidders from non-Government organisations will also need
to demonstrate:
• Two years of audited accounts.
• Evidence that they have delivered two capital projects of a similar scale
and scope in the last five years.
14.3 Stage 2 Assessment and Shortlisting: Bids will be assessed against 3 of the 4
criteria set out in the Prospectus. This is because there is no Characteristics of
Place Index in Northern Ireland for this first round. NI applications will be assessed
against strategic fit, value for money and deliverability in the same way as GB bids
(see Table 1 above for details), with the exception of MP support which will not be
reflected in the assessment, as MPs are not being asked to offer priority backing to
bids. The three criteria and the sub criteria under those again carry equal weighting.
A funding shortlist for NI will be drawn up from those bids that score the highest
overall, and who score at least average or above on strategic fit, value for money
and deliverability.
14.4 Stage 3 Decision making: After bid assessment and moderation has concluded,
and the shortlist has been drawn up, ministers will the make funding decisions from
the NI shortlist of bids. Ministers may also factor some or all of these additional
considerations into their decision making:
2 Eligible expenditure in 2021-22 could include capital development costs.
14
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_15>>>
Ensuring a reasonable thematic split of approved projects (e.g. across regeneration
and town centre, transport and culture and heritage);
• Ensuring a fair spread of approved projects across NI;
• Ensuring a fair balance of approved projects across places in need;
• Prioritisation of either ‘strategic fit’ or ‘deliverability’ or ‘value for money’
over the other criteria. The prioritisation and weighting at this stage may
be different from the weighting at assessment (noting this must be applied
consistently to all projects);
• Taking into account other investment in a local area. In future rounds, this
could include funding provided to local areas through the first round of this
Fund.
14.5 NI bids will only be assessed against other NI bids for fairness reasons, with funding
awarded from a ringfenced NI pot, in the region of £20 million, subject to strength of
bids submitted. This is because the NI assessment is only based on 3 out of the 4
criteria. We expect to announce the outcome of the competition in the Autumn.
15 List of Annexes
Annex A Glossary
Annex B Table of Interventions
Annex C Further Value for Money Guidance
Annex D Large Transport Scheme checklist
15
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_16>>>
Annex A: Glossary
Individual bid Submission made up of 1 project from 1 bidding entity/
local authority
Package bid A submission made up of 2 or 3 projects from 1 bidding
entity/ local authority
Joint bid A submission made up of 1 project or a package of up to
three projects by more than 1 bidding entity or local
authority
OAR Options Assessment Report
Cost-Benefit Analysis which assesses the value of as many of the
Analysis (CBA) costs and benefits of a proposal as feasible, including
items for which the market does not provide a
satisfactory measure of economic value.
Appraisal Refers to the assessment made before decisions are
taken of the economic, social, environmental, public
account and distributional impacts that an intervention
may have.
Benefit-Cost Ratio Given by PVB / PVC and indicates how much benefit is
(BCR) obtained for each unit of cost, with a BCR greater than 1
indicating that the benefits outweigh the costs.
Present Value of The sum of discounted costs and revenues to the budget
Costs (PVC) available over the appraisal period, and gives the value
of these impacts in the prices of a given base year.
Present Value of The sum of all discounted benefits and dis-benefits not
Benefits (PVB) included in the definition of the PVC over the appraisal
period, and gives the value of these impacts in the prices
of a given base year
Distributional Considers the variance of transport intervention impacts
Impacts (DIs) across different social groups.
Optimism Bias (OB The demonstrated systematic tendency for appraisers to
be over-optimistic about key project parameters,
including capital costs, operating costs, works duration
and benefits delivery.
A Quantified Risk Allows an expected value (defined as the average of all
Assessment (QRA possible outcomes, taking account of the different
probabilities of those outcomes occurring) of the cost of
the proposal to be calculated. This expected value should
form the ‘risk-adjusted' cost estimate.
Evaluation A systematic analytical process which examines the
effectiveness of a project based on actual results. This
can include what difference it made (impact evaluation),
whether its benefits justified its costs (economic
evaluation) and how it was delivered (process
evaluation).
16
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_17>>>
Annex B: Intervention framework
The table below outlines the types of interventions in scope for the Levelling Up Fund. Places may find this intervention framework
with associated outputs, outcomes ad indicators helpful in informing their logic models, and M&E plans. For proposed
interventions, bids should align with:
• Outputs: This sets out the kinds of intervention outputs that will be considered acceptable.
• Outcomes: This lists the acceptable outcomes that we would expect to flow from your chosen interventions. Local
authorities will be required to clearly demonstrate, through a Theory of Change (with supporting evidence and assumptions
clearly set out), how your proposed projects will deliver one or more of the outcomes in the table below.
• Outcome indicators: These are the indicators that will be used to set targets and measure progress and determine whether
the outcomes have been delivered.
Outputs Outcomes Outcome indicators
Examples include: • Impact of scheme on travel • Impact of scheme on travel demand
• Bus infrastructure demand o Road traffic flows for road schemes
Transport
upgrades e.g. bus priority o Road traffic flows for o Patronage for public transport schemes
Interventions
lanes. road schemes o Pedestrian / cycle counts for cycling /
• New or upgraded road o Patronage for public walking schemes
(Transport
infrastructure transport schemes o Reduced journey times and improved
projects o Pedestrian / cycle journey reliability
• New or upgraded cycle or
should have counts for cycling / o Travel times in the corridors of
walking paths.
the support walking schemes interest
• Wider cycling
of the • Reduced journey times and o Variability of travel times in the
infrastructure such as
relevant improved journey reliability corridors of interest
cycle parking.
authority or • Local economic benefits • Local economic benefits
body • Reduced transport carbon o Travel times / accessibility changes
responsible to businesses
emissions
for delivery). o Employment levels
• Improved air quality
o Rental values
17
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_18>>>
Outputs Outcomes Outcome indicators
o Other metrics of relevance to scheme
objectives
• Reduced transport carbon emissions
o modelled based on demand/vehicle
speed information
• Improved air quality
o Effect of the scheme on local air
quality in the area of interest
• Reduced noise
o Effect of the scheme on noise at
important receptor locations
• Fewer accidents
o Effect of the scheme on traffic
accidents in the area of interest
• Remediation and/or • Enhanced townscape that is • Perceptions of the place by
development of more attractive and more residents/businesses/visitors
abandoned or dilapidated accessible to residents, • Land values
sites businesses and visitors. • Footfall
Regeneration
• Delivery of quality
and town
residential or commercial
centre
space in key locations
investment
(town centres, gateway
areas, employment sites)
• Delivery of new public
spaces
18
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_19>>>
• New, upgraded or • Improved arts, cultural and • Number of visitors to arts, cultural and heritage
protected community heritage offer that is more events and venues
Cultural centres, sports or visible and easier for • Perceptions of the place by residents/visitors
investment athletics facilities, residents/visitors to access
museums, arts
venues, theatres,
libraries, film facilities,
prominent landmarks
or historical buildings,
parks or gardens
• New, upgraded or
protected community
hubs, spaces or assets,
where this links to local
• inclusive growth
19
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_20>>>
Annex C: Further Value for Money Assessment
An economic case will be required that assesses the value for money of the proposal
for which funding is sought.
Overall, the value for money assessment should provide suitable and proportionate
evidence of the expected impacts, benefits and costs, and overall value for money,
and associated risks and uncertainties.
The economic case should be assessed in a way that is consistent with the HM
Treasury Green Book and with relevant departmental guidance. For transport
schemes, the economic case analysis should be consistent with guidance in DfT’s
Transport Analysis Guidance. For regeneration projects and cultural projects, the
economic case should be consistent with MHCLG appraisal guidance. There are
further sources of appraisal guidance published by DfT or MHCLG that bidders may
use to provide appropriate analysis for specific types of projects. For example, DFT’s
Active Mode Appraisal Toolkit can be used for cycling and walking interventions.
Templates for appraisal tables for transport projects (including the Appraisal
Summary Table) are available at
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/webtag-appraisal-tables.
In line with the principles of these sources of appraisal guidance, benefits should,
where possible, be explained in terms of outcomes. For example, the economic case
analysis for transport proposals could demonstrate how they will reduce journey
times, support economic growth, or reduce carbon emissions.
The economic case should include the following:
• appropriate identification and estimation of relevant impacts, benefits and
costs. There should be clear justification provided for which types of impacts,
benefits and costs are considered, and that the analysis of these is
proportionate for the impacts and proposal being considered.
• a summary of the overall value for money of the proposal. Benefit Cost Ratios
(BCRs) should be reported if they can be estimated, and these should be
consistent with the relevant departmental appraisal guidance. If it is not
possible to estimate a BCR for the specific project, a clear explanation and
justification should be provided of why not.
• there should be appropriate identification and analysis of risks and
uncertainties that could affect the project impacts, benefits, costs, and overall
value for money.
• evidence of whether the project is likely to meet its strategic objectives,
referencing to and consistent with the assessment provided in the strategic
case.
A range of benefits could be considered in the value for money assessment of bids.
This includes potential to boost local economic growth, environmental benefits
(including contribution to achieving the UK Government’s Net Zero carbon
commitments and improving local air quality), greater employment opportunities,
reduced travel times to key services, increased footfall in town and city centres, crime
20
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_21>>>
reduction and social value to local communities. Bids for transport proposals in
particular should include clearly explaining their carbon benefits.
The level of detail provided should be in proportion to the amount of funding that is
requested. Bids will need to include comprehensive but proportionate assessment.
This will vary according to the cost of the proposal and the outcomes at stake.
For transport projects, evidence or metrics that can be used to understand the extent
to which the scheme contributes to local objectives/levelling-up could include:
• Socio-economic metrics. These metrics demonstrate whether the proposed
investment is focused on an area which is a priority for levelling-up. For
instance:
o Gross weekly earnings
o Unemployment rate; Employment rate
o Proportion of population educated to degree level or equivalent.
o Multiple Index of Deprivation Ranking
• Transport metrics. These metrics present comparative data on the
performance of the transport network in the targeted area. For example:
o Connectivity Measures such as the National Infrastructure
Commission’s Connectivity dataset
• Economic Impact metrics. The metrics provide insight on the potential impact
of the proposed investment on the local economy. For example:
o Transport User Benefits
o Wider Economic Impacts (where these have been estimated in the
business case)
21
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_22>>>
Annex D: Checklist for detailed business case submissions for larger
transport projects
The requirements in the tables below relate to larger transport projects. By
exception, there is also scope for the Fund to invest in larger transport projects of
between £20m and £50m.
The application form should be submitted by 18 June for all larger transport project
bids that are submitted for the first round of the Fund. It is expected that a more
detailed business case will need to be appraised before funding can be confirmed
for larger transport schemes. Therefore, DfT will assess the application form for
larger transport project bids and advise whether they should be developed further
and a more detailed business case should be prepared for review.
If available, a more detailed business case may be submitted for larger transport
project bids by 18 June in addition to the application form. The assessment of more
detailed business cases will occur at a later stage before funding can be confirmed
for larger transport project bids.
Please note that more detailed business cases for larger transport projects should
be in a transport business case format and be compliant with the Green Book’s five-
case model and the Department for Transport’s guidance on transport analysis
(TAG). More detailed business cases should include information requested in the
Application Form and more comprehensive plans and information for relevant
projects.
More detailed business case submissions should include information and materials
in the below checklist where applicable. The checklist should be completed and
submitted as part of any business case submissions in order to reference where
relevant information and materials are located the business case.
Strategic Case
Item Section/Page
A detailed description of the physical scope of the scheme
The objectives of the scheme and the case for investment
A description of the process by which the scheme came to be
identified as the preferred option for meeting those objectives
including why alternative options were discarded
For schemes that directly aim to facilitate commercial or housing
development on specific sites, details of the sites, current
planning status, status of developer commitment and the
expected impact of the scheme
22
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_23>>>
Item Section/Page
Details on how the project aligns with relevant local strategies
(such as Local Plans, Local Industrial Strategies or Local
Transport Plans) and local objectives for investment, improving
infrastructure and levelling up.
Evidence or metrics that can be used to understand the extent
to which the scheme contributes to local objectives/levelling-up
could include:
• Socio-economic metrics. These metrics demonstrate
whether the proposed investment is focused on an area
which is a priority for levelling-up. For instance:
o Gross weekly earnings
o Unemployment rate; Employment rate
o Proportion of population educated to degree level
or equivalent.
o Multiple Index of Deprivation Ranking
• Transport metrics. These metrics present comparative
data on the performance of the transport network in the
targeted area. For example:
o Connectivity Measures such as the National
Infrastructure Commission’s Connectivity dataset
• Economic Impact metrics. The metrics provide insight on
the potential impact of the proposed investment on the
local economy. For example:
o Transport User Benefits
Wider Economic Impacts (where these have been estimated in
the business case)
Explanation of how the project support UK Government policy
objectives and legal and statutory commitments. In particular,
OBCs or FBCs should explicitly explain how they support:
1. UK’s commitment to achieve net zero carbon emissions;
2. Improve cycling and walking infrastructure3
3. Improve bus infrastructure and services4
Details and evidence of support for the project from local
stakeholders
Details and evidence of support for the project from the local MP
3 UK Government expects that all local road projects in England funded by the UK Government will deliver or improve
cycling and walking infrastructure (unless it can be shown that there is little or no need to do so). Cycling proposals
should follow the Government’s cycling design guidance which sets out the standards required if schemes are to
receive funding.
4 Local road projects are expected to either support bus priority measures (unless bids can explain why doing so would
not be necessary or appropriate).
23
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_24>>>
Item Section/Page
Details of public consultation activities on the scheme to date,
and key findings including how any key questions/concerns
have been addressed.
Economic Case
As well as referencing the location of the below items of information within the
business case, please complete the checklist of appraisal and modelling supporting
materials and supply these materials as part of business case submissions.
Item Section/Page
Option Assessment Report (OAR)
Data Collection Report
Local Model Validation Report (LMVR)
Present Year Validation Report (if required)
Forecasting Report
Economic Appraisal Report
Social and Distributional Impacts Assessment
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan
Management Case
Item Section/Page
Governance structure including SRO, Project Board, Project
Manager, delivery partners and other key roles
Explanation of roles and responsibilities and resourcing levels
Detailed Project Plan
Risk Management:
Detailed Risk Register
1 Narrative to explain the most significant risks; how they are
being managed and their potential impact on time and
budget.
2 Risk management strategy
Project Assurance e.g. Gateway Reviews
Evaluation: Outline evaluation plan including a statement of core
evaluation objectives
24
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_25>>>
Commercial Case
Item Section/Page
Description of the preferred procurement strategy.
Rational for the selection of preferred procurement route against
possible alternatives.
Explanation of how costs and risks will be shared throughout the
contract.
Financial Case
Item Section/Page
Detailed cost breakdown
Detailed breakdown of funding sources, including UK
Government contribution, local and any third-party contributions
Explanation of the status of any third-party contributions (i.e.
whether these contributions are secured and confirmed) and
supporting evidence
Independent surveyor's report verifying cost estimates.
Details of and justification for inflation assumption used.
Quantified Risk Assessment
All scheme costings should include an amount for risk, based on
the results of a Quantified Risk Assessment (QRA) which
should be proportionate to the nature and complexity of the
project.
25
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_26>>>
Checklist of appraisal and modelling supporting material
Option Assessment
Item Section/Page
An Option Assessment Report to include steps 1 to 8 set out in
TAG – the transport appraisal process.
Modelling
Item Section/Page
Details of the sources, locations (illustrated on a map), methods
of collection, dates, days of week, durations, sample factors,
estimation of accuracy, etc.
Details of any specialist surveys (e.g. stated preference).
An Existing Data and Traffic Surveys Report to include:
Traffic and passenger flows; including daily, hourly and seasonal
profiles, including details by vehicle class where appropriate.
Journey times by mode, including variability if appropriate.
Details of the pattern and scale of traffic delays and queues.
Desire line diagrams for important parts of the network.
Diagrams of existing traffic flows, both in the immediate corridor
and other relevant corridors.
An Assignment Model Validation Report to include:
Description of the road traffic and public transport passenger
assignment model development, including model network and
zone plans, details of treatment of congestion on the road
system and crowding on the public transport system.
Description of the data used in model building and validation
with a clear distinction made for any independent validation
data.
Evidence of the validity of the networks employed, including
range checks, link length checks, and route choice evidence.
Details of the segmentation used, including the rationale for that
chosen.
26
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_27>>>
Item Section/Page
Validation of the trip matrices, including estimation of
measurement and sample errors.
Details of any 'matrix estimation' techniques used and evidence
of the effect of the estimation process on the scale and pattern
of the base travel matrices.
Validation of the trip assignment, including comparisons of flows
(on links and across screenlines/cordons) and, for road traffic
models, turning movements at key junctions.
Journey time validation, including, for road traffic models,
checks on queue pattern and magnitudes of delays/queues.
Detail of the assignment convergence.
Present year validation if the model is more than 5 years old.
A diagram of modelled traffic flows, both in the immediate
corridor and other relevant corridors.
A Demand Model Report to include:
Where no Variable Demand Model has been developed
evidence should be provided to support this decision (e.g. follow
guidance in TAG M2 Variable Demand Modelling – section 2.2).
Description of the demand model.
Description of the data used in the model building and
validation.
Details of the segmentation used, including the rationale for that
chosen. This should include justification for any segments
remaining fixed.
Evidence of model calibration and validation and details of any
sensitivity tests.
Details of any imported model components and rationale for
their use.
Validation of the supply model sensitivity in cases where the
detailed assignment models do not iterate directly with the
demand model.
Details of the realism testing, including outturn elasticities of
demand with respect to fuel cost and public transport fares.
Details of the demand/supply convergence.
27
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_28>>>
Item Section/Page
A Forecasting Report to include:
Description of the methods used in forecasting future traffic
demand.
Description of the future year demand assumptions (e.g. land
use and economic growth - for the do minimum, core and variant
scenarios).
An uncertainty log providing a clear description of the planning
status of local developments
Description of the future year transport supply assumptions (i.e.
networks examined for the do minimum, core scenario and
variant scenarios).
Description of the travel cost assumptions (e.g. fuel costs, PT
fares, parking).
Comparison of the local forecast results to national forecasts,
at an overall and sectoral level.
Presentation of the forecast travel demand and conditions for
the core scenario and variant scenarios including a diagram
of forecast flows for the do-minimum and the scheme options
for affected corridors.
If the model includes very slow speeds or high junction
delays evidence of their plausibility.
An explanation of any forecasts of flows above capacity,
especially for the do-minimum, and an explanation of how
these are accounted for in the modelling/appraisal.
Presentation of the sensitivity tests carried out (to include
high and low demand tests).
Cost Benefit Analysis
Item Section/Page
A clear explanation of the underlying assumptions used in the
Cost Benefit Analysis.
Information on local factors used. For example the derivation of
growth factors and annualisation factors in TUBA (to include full
details of any calculations).
A diagram of the network (if COBALT used).
28
Version 1.1
<<<PDF_PAGE_29>>>
Item Section/Page
Information on the number of junctions modelled (if COBALT
used), for both the do-minimum and the do-something.
Details of assumptions about operating costs and commercial
viability (e.g. public transport, park and ride, etc).
Full appraisal inputs/outputs (when used, COBALT and/or
TUBA input and output files in text format should be supplied).
Evidence that TUBA/COBALT warning messages have been
checked and found to be acceptable.
Spatial (sectoral) analysis of TEE benefits.
Details of the maintenance delay costs/savings.
Details of the delays during construction.
Appraisal tables (AMCB, PA, TEE) in excel format.
Economic Case Assessment
Item Section/Page
A comprehensive Appraisal Summary Table in excel format.
Assessment of Economic impacts.
Economic impacts worksheets.
Assessment of Environmental impacts, to include an
environmental constraints map.
Environmental impacts worksheets.
Assessment of Safety impacts and the assumed accident rates
presented (when used, COBALT output should be provided).
Assessment of Social impacts.
Assessment of Distributional impacts.
Social and distributional impacts worksheets (including DI
screening pro forma).
Cost pro forma.
29
Version 1.1