<<<PDF_PAGE_1>>>
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Report No: PAD3512
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
ON A
PROPOSED LOAN
IN THE AMOUNT OF
US$100 MILLION
TO THE
REPUBLIC OF AZERBAIJAN
FOR AN
EMPLOYMENT SUPPORT PROJECT
February 6, 2020
Social Protection and Jobs Global Practice
Europe And Central Asia Region
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
<<<PDF_PAGE_2>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective January 31, 2020)
Currency Unit = A z e rbaijani Manat (AZN)
AZN1= US$ 0.59
US$1 = AZN 1.70
FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 31
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
ABAD ASAN support for family business
ALMP Active Labor Market Program
AzRIP-2 Azerbaijan Rural Investment Project - 2
CPF Country Partnership Framework
DOST Dayanıqlı və Operativ Sosial Təminat Agentliyi (Center for Sustainable and
Operational Social Security)
EHSG Environmental Health and Safety Guideline
EU European Union
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GRM Grievance Redressal Mechanism
GRS Grievance Redress Service
IDP Internally Displaced Person
IFR Interim Financial Report
ILO International Labour Organization
IT Information Technology
KPI Key Performance Indicator
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MFI Microfinance Institution
MIS Management Information System
MLSPP Ministry of Labor and Social Protection of the Population
NEET Not in Employment, Education, or Training
NPV Net Present Value
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OPEC Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
PDO Project Development Objective
PES Public Employment Service
PIU Project Implementation Unit
<<<PDF_PAGE_3>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
PLR Performance Learning Review
POM Project Operations Manual
PPSD Project Procurement Strategy for Development
PSG Partial Credit Guarantee Schemes
PWD Person with Disabilities
SSC State Statistical Committee
SES State Employment Service
SEP Self-Employment Program
SEPCO Self-Employment Program Case Officer
SIYB Start and Improve Your Own Business
SME Small and Medium Enterprises
SEPIS Self-Employment Program Information System
STEP Systemic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
TSSA Targeted State Social Assistance
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
VFM Value for Money
VTC Vocational Training Center
Regional Vice President: Cyril E Muller
Country Director: Sebastian-A Molineus
Regional Director: Fadia M. Saadah
Practice Manager: Cem Mete
Task Team Leader(s): Sandor I. Karacsony, Maddalena Honorati
<<<PDF_PAGE_4>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... 1
I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT ...................................................................................................... 6
A. Country Context................................................................................................................................ 6
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context .................................................................................................... 7
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ............................................................................................. 11
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 12
A. Project Development Objective ..................................................................................................... 12
B. Project Components ....................................................................................................................... 13
C. Project Beneficiaries ....................................................................................................................... 21
D. Results Chain .................................................................................................................................. 21
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners ................................................................... 22
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design .................................................................... 23
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ............................................................................ 26
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements .......................................................................... 26
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements......................................................................... 27
C. Sustainability ................................................................................................................................... 28
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY ................................................................................... 28
A. Technical, Economic, and Financial Analysis (if applicable) ........................................................... 28
B. Fiduciary .......................................................................................................................................... 29
C. Legal Operational Policies ............................................................................................................... 30
D. Environmental and Social ............................................................................................................... 30
V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES ..................................................................................... 32
VI. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 32
VII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 35
ANNEX 1: DETAILED PROJECT DESCRIPTION ......................................................................... 43
ANNEX 2: IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS AND SUPPORT PLAN ................................... 60
ANNEX 3: ECONOMIC ANALYSIS ........................................................................................... 69
<<<PDF_PAGE_5>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
DATASHEET
BASIC INFORMATION
BASIC_INFO_TABLE
Country(ies) Project Name
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project
Project ID Financing Instrument Environmental and Social Risk Classification
Investment Project
P171250 Moderate
Financing
Financing & Implementation Modalities
[ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) [ ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[ ] Series of Projects (SOP) [ ] Fragile State(s)
[ ] Disbursement-linked Indicators (DLIs) [ ] Small State(s)
[ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Project-Based Guarantee [ ] Conflict
[ ] Deferred Drawdown [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[ ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA)
Expected Approval Date Expected Closing Date
05-Mar-2020 31-Dec-2025
Bank/IFC Collaboration
No
Proposed Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to improve vulnerable people's access to employment.
Components
Component Name Cost (US$, millions)
Page 1 of 71
<<<PDF_PAGE_6>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
1. Enhancing the scope and effectiveness of the Self-Employment Program (SEP) 95.50
2. Strengthening employment services and programs 2.00
3. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 2.50
Organizations
Borrower: Republic of Azerbaijan
Implementing Agency: Ministry of Labor and Social Protection of the Population (MLSPP)
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)
SUMMARY
-NewFin1
Total Project Cost 100.00
Total Financing 100.00
of which IBRD/IDA 100.00
Financing Gap 0.00
DETAILS
-NewFinEnh1
World Bank Group Financing
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 100.00
Expected Disbursements (in US$, Millions)
WB Fiscal Year 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Annual 10.53 23.39 22.51 21.64 21.52 0.42
Cumulative 10.53 33.92 56.43 78.07 99.58 100.00
INSTITUTIONAL DATA
Practice Area (Lead) Contributing Practice Areas
Social Protection & Jobs Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation
Page 2 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_7>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
Climate Change and Disaster Screening
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT)
Risk Category Rating
1. Political and Governance ⚫ Substantial
2. Macroeconomic ⚫ Moderate
3. Sector Strategies and Policies ⚫ Moderate
4. Technical Design of Project or Program ⚫ Substantial
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability ⚫ Substantial
6. Fiduciary ⚫ Substantial
7. Environment and Social ⚫ Moderate
8. Stakeholders ⚫ Moderate
9. Other
10. Overall ⚫ Substantial
COMPLIANCE
Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes [✓] No
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✓] No
Page 3 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_8>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
E & S Standards Relevance
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts Relevant
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure Relevant
Labor and Working Conditions Relevant
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management Relevant
Community Health and Safety Relevant
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement Not Currently Relevant
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Relevant
Resources
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Not Currently Relevant
Local Communities
Cultural Heritage Not Currently Relevant
Financial Intermediaries Not Currently Relevant
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
No later than thirty (30) days after the Effective Date, establish and thereafter operate and maintain, throughout
Project implementation a Steering Committee responsible for Project oversight and coordination, led by MLSPP,
and with the composition and functions set forth in the Project Operational Manual.
Sections and Description
No later than thirty (30) days after the Effective Date, establish and maintain, throughout Project implementation, a
Working Group led by the PIU, with the composition and functions set forth in the Project Operational Manual.
Sections and Description
No later than two (2) months after the Effective Date, approve and implement an annual training program on the
Environmental and Social Standards, according to the terms and conditions set forth in the Project Operational
Manual.
Page 4 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_9>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
Conditions
Type Description
Effectiveness The PIU has been established by the Borrower, through MLSSP, with the staffing, functions
and resources set forth in the Project Operational Manual, which include, inter alia: (i) a
director, (ii) a procurement specialist, (iii) a financial management specialist, (iv) an
environmental specialist, and (v) a social specialist.
Type Description
Effectiveness The Project Operational Manual has been adopted by the Borrower in a manner and with
content acceptable to the Bank.
Page 5 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_10>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT
A. Country Context
1. Over the last 15 years, strong economic growth has propelled Azerbaijan into the upper-middle-
income status. The country’s gross national income (Atlas method) per capita rose from US$610 in 2000
to US$4,080 in 2017.1 The rapid transformation was made possible by the exploitation of hydrocarbon
resources (oil production) and high levels of public expenditure. Mining, which mainly represents oil and
gas, contributed about 50 percent to the total gross domestic product (GDP) from 2005 to 2012 (State
Statistical Committee [SSC]). Among the non-oil sectors, the biggest increase took place in the
construction sector. However, in the last few years economic growth slowed substantially. A collapse in
global oil prices in 2014–2016 led to a decrease in real GDP by 3.1 percent. The resulting macroeconomic
instability wiped off the external surplus and sharply reduced government revenues. Many sectors,
especially in the non-oil industry, remain underdeveloped and grew only marginally over the years. While
services became more important in Azerbaijan’s economy, most service activity takes place in non-
tradable sectors such as transportation, public administration, and education.
2. During 2017–2018, the Azerbaijan economy began to recover, albeit at a sluggish pace,
supported by favorable terms of trade and stable oil production. Economic growth was only 0.1 percent
in 2017 and accelerated to 1.4 percent in 2018, with the non-oil sector leading the modest recovery.
Agricultural growth averaged 4.5 percent, fueled by higher exports to the Russian Federation, and output
in most service sectors recovered to the prerecession levels. Construction remains an exception to this
pattern, still posting negative growth rates. Oil sector output growth was limited by Azerbaijan’s
participation in the agreement between Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and
non-OPEC countries. On the expenditure side, caps on oil sector output resulted in modest exports
contribution to growth, while domestic demand was held back by subdued wage and credit growth.
3. Since 2015, slower economic growth and high inflation have impaired economic performance
in Azerbaijan, posing a threat of reversing the progress attained by the country on poverty reduction.
Azerbaijan experienced significant and steady poverty reduction, with the poverty rate2 declining between
2005 and 2015 from 29 percent to 4.6 percent and the middle class3 growing from 18.9 percent to 55.6
percent over the same time period. There are also significant spatial disparities in welfare across regions
as well as between rural and urban areas within each region. Poverty in Azerbaijan is concentrated in rural
areas, and the leading areas in development are mainly urban, including Baku. Azerbaijan’s progress
toward achieving the World Bank Group’s twin goals was brought about by public sector-driven growth,
in combination with increases in wages and social transfers.
4. The growth model has been driven by strong foreign direct investment inflows and the oil
boom, though it has not created enough high productivity jobs. Employment growth has not been
keeping pace with the growth of the country’s economy. The economic boom caused a huge increase in
productivity in mining, which is not labor intensive (employs only about 1 percent of the workforce). The
majority of the workforce is employed in low productivity sectors: 36 percent of workers work in
agriculture (the share is higher in rural areas), most in subsistence agriculture, and 6.7 percent in trade
1 http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/azerbaijan.
2 Using the international upper-middle-income poverty line of US$5.5 per day per capita in 2011 prices.
3 Where middle class is defined as earning US$11 or more per day per capita in 2011 prices.
Page 6 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_11>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
services. Very few workers are employed in productive sectors with export potential, such as financial and
business services (4 percent) and manufacturing (7 percent). Self-employment is high (45 percent),
especially in rural areas (84 percent of those working in agriculture are self-employed). Self-employment
is also fairly prominent as a share of total employment in construction (58 percent) and transportation
(45 percent). Financial and business services also have a high proportion (44 percent) of self-employed,
possibly due to the prevalence of independent professions and highly skilled consultants in these areas.
While self-employment can be a very heterogeneous category, encompassing both high-growth
entrepreneurs and subsistence work, the vast majority (over 90 percent) of self-employment in Azerbaijan
is own-account work, that is, people working for themselves without employees. This suggests that self-
employment is of a small-scale, subsistence nature, rather than reflecting truly entrepreneurial activities.
5. Employment outcomes are lower for women, youth, internally displaced persons (IDPs), and
people with lower levels of education. While Azerbaijan’s overall labor force participation rate (71
percent in 2016, approximately 5 million people) is in line with that of other Europe and Central Asian
countries, low female labor force participation is a concern (labor force participation rate is 54 percent
for women as opposed to 75 percent for men).4 Labor force participation is higher in rural areas, mostly
because the rural workforce is employed in subsistence agriculture. Highly educated individuals are
significantly more likely to participate in the labor force. IDPs have lower employment rates and higher
inactivity rates than non-IDPs. They have few income-generating options and are highly dependent on
state transfers and subsidies as their main source of income. Youth face significant challenges entering
the labor market, and many young women are not in employment, education, or training (NEET). The
NEET rate for youth 15–24 years old in Azerbaijan was about 24 percent in 2015. However, the gender
gap is substantial: at 32 percent the female NEET rate is three times higher than that of young men (11
percent). The high female NEET rate is due to limited job opportunities, skill mismatches, and family
responsibilities for women. Many employers report a lack of adequate skills among potential employees,
highlighting the importance of high-quality education (Rutkowski 2015).5 Overall, unemployment is quite
low at 5 percent, although unemployment is higher for youth and for people ages fifty and above
indicating that the labor market is only partially able to absorb older, more experienced, workers.
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context
6. Though Azerbaijan has recently increased investment in social policies, social protection
spending is still low compared to the regional average. The Government has made significant
improvements related to social and labor policies in 2019, such as increasing the coverage of the main
social assistance program, increasing the minimum wage and pension benefit amounts, and launching the
first DOST6 office in Baku to improve the efficiency of the social services delivery. The share of the total
government budget7 allocated to social protection including social insurance, social assistance, and labor
market programs was 10.3 percent (AZN 2.3 billion) in 2019. This was 11 percent higher than the previous
4 World Bank. 2019. “Improving Employment Outcomes in Azerbaijan”, Working Paper, Washington, D.C., World Bank.
5 Rutkowski, Jan. 2015. Demand for skills: main results of the Azerbaijan STEP employer survey, Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
6 DOST, the Azerbaijani acronym for Centers for Sustainable and Operational Social Security, is a one-stop shop center to
administer the front office functions related to the administration of social services (pensions, disability benefits, and social
assistance benefits). The first DOST center was launched in Baku in May 2019. Three more centers are expected to be launched
in 2020 throughout the country. DOSTs are under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Labor and Social Protection of the Population
(MLSPP).
7 In 2019, the total government budget was AZN 25 billion, 11.2 percent higher than the previous year, in part to address social
issues.
Page 7 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_12>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
year, representing about 5 percent of GDP. This level of spending is below the average among Europe and
Central Asia countries (8.6 percent of GDP) and the European Union (EU) (19 percent of GDP). Social
insurance (pensions) accounts for about 85 percent of social protection spending. Spending on social
assistance is among the lowest in the region, around 0.8 percent of GDP. The Targeted State Social
Assistance (TSSA), the main poverty targeted cash transfer program, is the largest social assistance
program in the country, representing around 38 percent of the total social assistance expenditure in 2017,
equivalent to 0.3 percent of GDP. This share has declined since 2014—when the share of TSSA in social
assistance spending was 42 percent—due to the gradual decrease in the total coverage of the program
(in turn due to implementation issues related to the new automated application system). The TSSA
program’s scale rebounded only recently, in 2019. Spending on labor market programs is still low—about
0.04 percent of GDP in 2017—though the budget allocated to the Unemployment Insurance Fund has
increased significantly in the past two years driven by an expansion of the Self-Employment Program (SEP)
and unemployment benefits. Labor market programs include unemployment assistance, vocational
training, SEPs, and employment services delivered through the State Employment Service (SES) (Table 1).
7. Almost two-thirds of the population benefits from social protection transfers, although
coverage of the poor people with social assistance is low. In 2017, about 50 percent of households were
recipients of contributory social insurance transfers (mostly pensions) and about 25 percent of households
were recipients of social assistance programs. The TSSA program covers about 60,000 households, less
than 5 percent of the population as of July 2019; only one out of five households in the poorest quintile
were beneficiaries of the TSSA program in Azerbaijan as of 2015 (based on the latest household survey
data available to the team).
Table 1. Spending on Labor Market Policies in Azerbaijan (AZN, millions)
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Unemployment benefit 5.60 5.90 15.20 17.50 12.80 2.20
SEP 0.00 0.00 0.00 6.00 30.10 55.10
Vocational training and additional education 0.90 0.90 1.10 0.90 1.00 1.50
Professional orientation 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.60 1.30
Public works 0.20 0.20 0.08 0.10 0.10 0.90
Labor fairs and labor exchanges 0.40 0.50 0.50 0.60 0.80 0.10
Total 7.10 7.50 16.80 25.10 45.40 61.20
Source: MLSPP.
8. The SES offers a limited array of active labor market programs (ALMPs). The SES is an agency
subordinated to the MLSPP and is responsible for the implementation of public employment services
(PESs) and programs. It has about 86 local offices in the country and approximately 713 staff. Programs
available to registered unemployed people include job search, job counseling, vocational training, vacancy
fairs, public works, the SEP, and unemployment assistance benefits (accounting for one-third of the
budget).8 Jobseekers’ registration and job intermediation functions will be increasingly implemented in
coordination with DOSTs. As of December 2019, the SES had about 78,000 individuals registered as
8 By law, both public and private employers are required to submit available vacancies to the SES. However, only a fraction of
vacancies available in the economy are intermediated through SES channels as most employers do not register their vacancies
with the SES. Vacancies registered at the SES tend to be for unskilled or semiskilled workers and, consequently, mostly for low
wage jobs.
Page 8 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_13>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
unemployed (about 30 percent of the total unemployed in the country). The ‘unemployment status’ is a
requirement for being eligible to the menu of SES employment service.9 Few of the registered unemployed
belong to vulnerable groups. Among the registered unemployed people, the shares of IDPs, disabled
people, and beneficiaries of the TSSA are very low (11.5 percent, 1.4 percent, and 1 percent, respectively).
A third of the registered unemployed are women and 30 percent of them are youth (18–29 years). Almost
two-thirds are short-term unemployed (having been unemployed for less than six months), whereas only
one out of five is long-term unemployed (having been unemployed for more than two years). Almost half
of them (26,000) have completed tertiary education, and most of the unemployed have at least completed
general secondary education.10
9. The SEP was launched as an instrument to provide a ‘productive safety net’ to poor and
vulnerable people and reduce their dependency on public support. The SEP is the largest ALMP in
Azerbaijan managed by the SES under the MLSPP. The program, originally piloted in 2014 by International
Labour Organization (ILO),11 was scaled up nationally in 2016, based on a presidential decree. The SEP
provides basic business training, support to prepare a business plan, and in-kind assets (with an average
value of AZN 7,000)12 to vulnerable unemployed people with the objective to promote their self-
sufficiency through livelihood support and reduce dependency on public support. The priority groups for
the program participation were ‘socially marginalized and not protected people’ and persons with
disabilities (PWDs). The original objective of the SEP was to provide ‘active’ support to workable
vulnerable individuals, complementing the TSSA which provides regular ‘passive’ monthly cash transfers
for poor and vulnerable people who are not able to work due to illness, family duties, and other
constraints. In that sense, the SEP was launched as a graduation pathway for the TSSA workable
beneficiaries. The rationale for the in-kind assets transfers is that poor and vulnerable individuals lack
collateral to borrow through commercial banks and have limited access to markets (in addition to higher
skills and mobility constraints).
10. Building on the experience of the pilot, a presidential decree mandated the Government to
scale up the SEP to other rayons.13 Program funding amounted to approximately AZN 6 million in 2017,
which supported the scale-up to 84 regions and cities. In 2018, the Government invested AZN 35.8 million
9 The unemployment status is obtained as follows: when a person registers at the SES, he/she is treated as a ‘jobseeker’ for five
business days. Within this period, the SES tries to place the jobseeker in a private sector job or with public works. If the jobseeker
receives a job placement, he/she either accepts the job and leaves the SES, or rejects the job offer and consequently cannot stay
registered with the SES. If the person does not receive a job offer within five days, he/she automatically becomes registered as
unemployed and can subsequently access the SEP and other ALMPs.
10 SES data as of June 2019.
11 The SEP was piloted in the Goychay region in 2014 with support from the ILO. The pilot was very small in scale: 21 beneficiaries
(17 men and 4 women) and four trainers. Emphasis was placed on the background of the applicants, especially whether they had
any previous experience in the economic activity they were planning to undertake and whether they had any connections or
relations that could help with the activity implementation, such as education and family background. Both the future trainers and
program participants were trained together for a period of two months. The two-month-training focused primarily on the (a)
legal requirements, (b) development of a business plan, (c) tax rules, (d) basic accounting, (e) marketing tools and activities, (f)
social insurance requirements, and (g) employment principles (for those who may employ workers later).
12 The average and maximum monetary value of in-kind assets is subject to changes proportionally to changes in the Consumer
Price Index. Changes will be introduced through a procedure established in the Project Operational Manual.
13 Decree of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan dated April 7, 2016, "On Additional Measures to Ensure Employment of
the Population.”
Page 9 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_14>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
on the SEP from the Unemployment Insurance Fund.14 The number of beneficiaries increased from 1,281
in 201715 to close to 8,000 in both 2018 and 2019, respectively. The state budget investment for the next
years is expected to cover 10,000 beneficiaries annually. The criteria for the distribution of funds among
regions has been based on local consultative activities and labor market analysis carried out by the MLSPP,
including data on the unemployment rate and the number of farms. Based on administrative data shared
by the SES, 83 percent of the SEP activities are generated from livestock assets transfers, while the
remaining 17 percent are activities in manufacturing (for example, textiles and furniture); food processing
(for example, butchery and bakery); services (for example, mechanic and barber); and non-livestock
agriculture (for example, intensive gardening) generated from assets different from livestock. Only about
40 percent of the program beneficiaries belong to a vulnerable group (as defined by the law: women,
youth, IDPs and refugees, TSSA beneficiaries, veterans, and PWDs). Only 20 percent of the program
beneficiaries are women.
11. Existing evidence on the SEP’s performance points to general positive feedback among
beneficiaries and to specific areas to improve the program’s effectiveness. According to a 2018 survey
of SEP beneficiaries administered by the MLSPP, the general feedback on skills acquired through the
program was positive. The SEP beneficiaries are optimistic about their income-generating activities
prospects, though they could not answer when asked about business forecasting. The effectiveness of the
SEP could be improved by carrying out training and supervision not only at the end of the project, but
during the life span of the project. Specifically, the evaluation recommends the inclusion of (a) individual
business coaching to further develop skills and ensure the continuity of knowledge acquired during the
business training, (b) additional ‘on-the-job training’ to develop practical skills, (c) vocational training in
addition to business training, and (d) the development of monitoring plans for in-kind assets. Focus groups
with the SEP beneficiaries as part of stakeholder consultations suggest that (a) beneficiaries’ main
motivation for applying for the program was to become an entrepreneur; (b) the program achieves a
higher gender balance in urban than rural areas as the SEP supports mainly livestock rearing in the latter,
which is traditionally a male activity; (c) beneficiaries were unhappy with the long duration it took for
them to receive the assets; and (d) beneficiaries complained about not being able to reapply to the
program. Furthermore, consultations with the SES employees revealed the SEP beneficiaries’ strong
preference to receive more training in relevant areas.
12. An assessment conducted as part of the EU twinning project16 suggests that the implementation
and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) capacity of the SES is low. The SES staff caseload—the ratio of
clients to employment counseling staff—is quite high. By the end of 2019, on average, there were 300
registered jobseekers for one SES staff (within the EU, the average staff caseload is around 1:150; the
figure recommended by the ILO is 1:100.). However, the current selection practices of SES staff do not
ensure that staff have the competencies required for employment services. Hiring decisions are made
based on the general hiring procedure for civil servants, which does not take into consideration skills
14 The Unemployment Insurance Fund was created in 2018 as part of the country’s reform of the Law on Employment. Both
employers and employees contribute 0.5 percent of the employee’s salary to the fund. The fund’s objective is to finance
unemployment benefits and ALMPs. A total of 40 percent of the fund’s overall budget is dedicated to the SEP.
15 A total of 1,767 applicants were selected, of whom 1,644 completed a two-month training; 1,339 business plans were approved
and finally, 1,281 participants received assets (58 dropped out, while waiting for the assets). Each of the awarded participants
received, on average, an asset in the amount of AZN 4,000.
16 Report by the EU Twinning Project No. AZ13 ENI. Twinning is an EU instrument for institutional cooperation between public
administrations of the EU member states and beneficiary or partner countries. In the case of Azerbaijan, Lithuanian officials
provided technical assistance to the SES.
Page 10 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_15>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
specific for SES employees. Furthermore, it does not guarantee that new hires have sufficient information
technology (IT) skills, which are a prerequisite for being effective at their job. Currently, the SES does not
provide any introductory training to its staff and has no recruitment channels for hiring of specialists such
as social workers or psychologists. Lastly, the SES does not provide opportunities for employees to
specialize in functions, such as case management, nor does it conduct any profiling of clients, and has
limited interactions with employers. At the same time, some SES staff has undergone job-specific
trainings; and SES is currently finalizing its training strategy for 2020.
13. The vocational training centers (VTCs), operated by the MLSPP, require upgrading of curricula
and training materials, as well as stronger links with employers if they are to provide labor market-
relevant skills training. The MLSPP operates two VTCs in Baku and Goychay,17 providing short-term
vocational training (up to a maximum of three months) for unemployed individuals registered with the
SES. The primary purpose of these training centers is to train active jobseekers (registered with the SES
with an ‘unemployed’ status) to improve their employability as well as retrain existing workers, especially
those at risk of losing their job and develop their capacities and assist them in job-to-job transitions. The
supply of certified vocational training courses by the VTCs is very limited and the scale is small: about
3,000 people are trained every year. An assessment of the VTCs, conducted as part of project
preparations, found that the choice of training modules is based largely on the supply of programs
available at the school and is not responsive to labor market needs. The VTCs have outdated workshops
and equipment and limited resources to retrain instructors.
14. The proposed project builds on previous lending and analytical engagement. The Social
Protection Development Project (P105116)—which closed in 2015—supported the MLSPP to improve the
delivery of labor market and social protection interventions through strengthened institutions, enhanced
institutional and human resources capacity, and improved targeting of social safety net programs. It
contributed to strengthening institutions and human resources capacity and improving the targeting of
social safety net programs. The recently completed South Caucasus Jobs Diagnostics and Advisory Services
(P168811) conducted a review of the SEP (as well as of all social protection and labor programs)18 and an
assessment of hiring constraints among employers that was included and framed in the report titled
‘Improving Employment Outcomes in Azerbaijan’. The analysis indicates that lack of skills (technical,
interpersonal, and noncognitive) is among the main constraints employers face when hiring skilled labor.
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives
15. The proposed operation is built around supporting the SEP implemented by the Government of
Azerbaijan. The proposed activities aim to improve and scale up the program, consistently with the
recently adopted ‘Employment Strategy of the Republic of Azerbaijan for 2019–2030’19 and its Action Plan,
laid out in the ‘Law on Employment’ (No. 1196-VQ adopted on June 29, 2018). The third priority direction
on ‘increasing the scope and efficiency of the ALMPs and strengthening the integration of citizens in need
of social protection and those who have difficulties in finding an employment into labor market’ points to
the need to enhance the effectiveness and scale of interventions supporting entrepreneurship and self-
17 The other VTC center in Ganja will be operational in 2020.
18 World Bank. 2018. “Azerbaijan. Recent Crisis, Welfare and Social Protection.”
19 On October 30, 2018, the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan ordered a Decree on “Approval of the Employment Strategy
of the Republic of Azerbaijan for 2019–2030."
Page 11 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_16>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
employment through ‘ABAD’20 centers and the SEP. Article 24 in the Law on Employment specifies the
form of self-employment as materials, equipment, and other property that is provided to the beneficiary
on a contractual basis for two years: design parameters of World Bank support have been developed
consistently with this requirement.21 The project also seeks to design private sector pathways for the SEP
beneficiaries with high potential to grow.
16. The proposed project is in line with the objectives of the World Bank Group’s Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for Azerbaijan for the period FY16-20 (Report No. 95860-AZ, June 3, 2015).
The recently completed Performance Learning Review (PLR) of the CPF extends the implementation
period of the CPF until FY21 and reconfirms the importance of increased investments in human
development to address the existing social challenges, including high informality, underemployment, and
low labor force participation, particularly among women and youth. Increased investment in human
development would help address rural-urban disparities, as well as those across income groups and
gender. One of the priorities for the remainder of the CPF mentioned in the draft PLR is to contribute to
the Government’s SEP. In this sense, the proposed project is in line with Focus Area 1, in particular
Objective 1.2: Support access to, and satisfaction with, public services, and Focus Area 2 of the CPF
(Economic Competitiveness), according to the updated structure outlined in the PLR.
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
A. Project Development Objective
17. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve vulnerable people’s access to
employment. Vulnerable people are defined in accordance with the Law on Employment as beneficiaries
of the TSSA program, IDPs, refugees, women, youth, PWDs, long-term unemployed, individuals with less
than two years until retirement, and former convicts. The project will target in particular four of these
groups: the TSSA beneficiaries, IDPs, women, and youth who are either inactive or unemployed registered
with the SES. Employment refers to both self-employment and wage employment opportunities.
PDO Level Indicators
18. The achievement of the PDO will be measured by the following indicators:
(a) Share of SEP businesses in operation 24 months after asset transfer, by vulnerable group
(b) Employment rate among registered jobseekers, by vulnerable groups, including gender
20 ABAD stands for “ASAN support for family businesses” and provide support for family-owned small and medium enterprises
(SMEs) in rural areas of Azerbaijan.
21 During project preparation, the team has (a) discussed the option of providing cash grants versus in-kind transfers and (b)
offered lessons in a technical seminar from interventions providing microloans to entrepreneurs from marginalized communities,
based on the experience of the Hungarian ‘Kiútprogram’ microcredit facility. Neither option was deemed applicable as a result of
the referenced legislative framework.
Page 12 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_17>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
B. Project Components
19. To achieve the PDO, activities will support improved self-employment opportunities and also
build institutional capacity. Against its PDO, the project establishes three components, with the following
respective subcomponents:
• Component 1: Enhancing the scope and effectiveness of the Self-Employment Program (SEP)
o Subcomponent 1.1: Expanding the program scale and scope of support
o Subcomponent 1.2: Testing the introduction of complementary business support
services for selected SEP beneficiaries
o Subcomponent 1.3: Improving the governance and coordination mechanism of SEP
• Component 2: Strengthening employment services and programs
o Subcomponent 2.1: Labor market assessment and development of a VTC strategy
o Subcomponent 2.2: Outreach, profiling, skills assessment, and case management for
jobseekers
• Component 3: Project management, monitoring, and evaluation
o Subcomponent 3.1: Project management
o Subcomponent 3.2: Monitoring and Evaluation
20. The project will be implemented through the network of local SES centers under the leadership
of the MLSPP. In agreement with the MLSPP, the project will start operating in 27 selected rayons22 in
2020 and then expand to other rayons (as approved by the World Bank) to support only SEP beneficiaries
requesting non-livestock-related assets. SEP beneficiaries requesting livestock23 will be supported by the
government-sponsored SEP. The initial 27 rayons to be supported by the project in 2020 have been
selected based on agreed objective criteria to represent different economic-geographic conditions in
Azerbaijan. The Government ranked rayons (and subrayons in Baku) based on their combined percentage
of (a) the country’s population, (b) the share of registered unemployed residing in that area, and (c) the
share of all individuals who have applied to the SEP. Starting from 2021, the project will be gradually
scaled up to other rayons (as approved by the World Bank).
22 The 27 rayons include Binagadi, Khazar, Yasamal, Nasimi, Surakhani, and Khatai sub-rayons in Baku; the Sumgait rayon in
Absheron, Ganja-Nimazi, Shamkir; Tovuz rayons in Ganja-Gazakh; the Gabala and Shaki rayon in Shaki-Zaqatala; the Masali and
Lankaran rayon in Lankaran; the Khachmaz and Guba rayon in Guba-Khachmaz; the Shirvan Mingachevir, Yevlakh, Barda,
Goychay, Imishli, and Salyan rayons in Aran; the Agyhdam and Fuzuli rayons in Yukhari-Garabagh; and Ismayili and Shamaki rayons
in Daghlig Sirvan. Project activities will only be carried out in areas controlled by the Government.
23 The MLSPP defines livestock as asset transfers of cows, sheep, goats, and chickens. Transfers of bees (for honey production),
which have proved successful under the project pilot, are not classified as livestock.
Page 13 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_18>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
Component 1: Enhancing the scope and effectiveness of the Self-Employment Program (SEP) (US$95.5
million)
21. The objective of this component is to support the scale-up of the SEP and improve its
effectiveness by diversifying the economic sectors of SEP businesses and complementing the existing
SEP with additional services. Starting 2021,24 the project will support about 5,000 SEP beneficiaries per
year with non-livestock assets, in addition to about 10,000 beneficiaries per year receiving livestock assets
as part of the SEP sponsored by the Government. The project will support SEP beneficiaries who plan to
start an income-generating activity not related to livestock and hence will provide in-kind assets
exclusively in the form of machinery, tools, and equipment. The government-funded SEP will instead
support the SEP beneficiaries requesting to initiate activities related to livestock. The project will support
the scale-up of the program and enhance the program effectiveness by strengthening the business
training component; providing the technical skills needed to expand the scope of the SEP activities toward
manufacturing and services (reducing the predominance of the SEP activities related to livestock);
introducing complementary business support services for selected businesses with higher probability to
grow and expand after the SEP (mentoring visits, incentives to accumulate savings, and additional capital);
strengthening the program implementation capacity (including improving its targeting, monitoring, and
staff capacity); and coordinating with the TSSA program. To enhance the program’s impact among
women, this component—in particular, Subcomponents 1.1. and 1.2—will streamline training to
encourage motivation and the development of an entrepreneurial mindset (this has proven to be
especially impactful among women); provide financial incentives to open saving accounts; and build the
capacity for entrepreneurial activities in occupations (for example, identified by the Azerbaijan Rural
Investment Project 2 [AzRIP-2]) as preferred by women (for example, tailoring, food processing, and so
on).
Subcomponent 1.1: Expanding the program scale and scope of support (US$93.3 million)
22. This subcomponent will support the scale-up of the SEP, diversification of SEP businesses, and
enhancement of the business training currently implemented under the program. This subcomponent
will:
(a) Enhance the 40-hour, class-based ILO ‘Start and Improve Your Business’ (SIYB) training
module,25 which is currently implemented as part of the SEP by strengthening the business
practices module, by adding an orientation day to strengthen the beneficiaries
understanding of the program and local economies, adding a financial literacy module,
adding psycho-motivational elements throughout the training to develop key behaviors
associated with a proactive entrepreneurial mindset, and showcasing success stories among
the previous SEP beneficiaries;
(b) Provide in-kind assets (with the exclusion of livestock assets which will be provided by the
government-sponsored SEP) to approximately 22,000 SEP beneficiaries over the course of
the project to support the start-up of income-generating activities based on approved
business plans;
24 Around 2,000 beneficiaries are expected to be supported in 2020 after project effectiveness.
25 The SIYB training consists of four modules: (a) generate your business idea, (b) start your business, (c) improve your business,
and (d) expand your business.
Page 14 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_19>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
(c) Provide follow-up visits to ensure that the knowledge acquired at the business training is
applied ‘on-the-job’;
(d) Subsidize the cost of opening a bank account for those who decide to open an account;
(e) Outsource to private providers the delivery of technical trainings for selected nonfarming
activities/occupations in demand by the SEP beneficiaries whose supply by the VTCs is
limited; and
(f) Upgrade the curricula of selected courses and equipment in the two VTCs operated by the
SES.
23. The enhanced business and psycho-motivational training is meant to equip beneficiaries with a
minimum set of business practices, financial literacy, personal motivation, and entrepreneurial mindset
associated with successful entrepreneurship26 as well as to assist them in the preparation of business
plans (to be evaluated and approved). Exposure to success stories from peers (‘role models’) will be
mainstreamed in the business training to foster beneficiaries’ aspirations and their capacity to visualize
success. The maximum value of the in-kind grants will be AZN 7,000 consistent with the government-run
SEP. A list of potential in-kind assets to be financed by the project has been developed and costed based
on the demand from the existing SEP beneficiaries whose business plans requested assets other than
livestock.27 A participative approach through the involvement of existing consultative mechanisms
between local stakeholders and the SES will be leveraged to identify and encourage beneficiaries to
initiate potential business activities that respond to respective local economies and product markets. At
the orientation workshop, promising business areas will be presented to promote the diversification from
livestock-related activities and encourage SEP beneficiaries to start businesses in the manufacturing and
services sectors.
24. The provision of short technical training courses will be aligned with local labor market
conditions and demand from program applicants. The provision of the technical training will be carried
out through third-party private providers, and through the MLSPP VTCs, depending on their capacity. As
more VTCs are expected to be opened during the project life cycle, it is expected that more beneficiaries
will be trained in VTCs over the course of the project. Initially, the project will significantly outsource the
provision of specific basic technical training (of about one-month duration) to private providers through
a competitive bidding process. As most of the existing market for basic technical training consists of
nonaccredited providers (there is currently only one accredited private provider in Azerbaijan),
accreditation will not be considered as a requirement, though a set of qualification criteria will be
developed to allow only prequalified providers to bid. Every year, about 3,000 SEP beneficiaries are
26 Campos, F. et al. (2018): “Teaching personal initiative beats traditional training in boosting small business in West Africa”,
Science, Vol. 257, Is. 6357; McKenzie, D. & Woodruff, C. (2017): "Business Practices in Small Firms in Developing Countries,"
Management Science, Vol 63(9), pp.2967-2981. Bloom, N. & Van Reenen, J. (2007): "Measuring and Explaining Management
Practices Across Firms and Countries," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT Press, vol. 122(4), pp. 1351-1408
27 Assets are provided for the following types of businesses: manufacturing of textile goods, car washing, footwear manufacturing,
beauty salon, barbershop, manufacturing of furniture, bakery, joiners shop, confectionery shop, car painting, car mechanic, car
electrician, photo studio, plastic door and window production, carpentry shop, tire repair shop, greenhouse farming, door and
window production, video operator, floor polishing, butcher shop, dairy processing, and household services (equipment repair).
Page 15 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_20>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
expected to participate in the technical training as part of the SEP package to optimize the use of assets
provided under the program.
Subcomponent 1.2: Testing the introduction of complementary business support services for selected SEP
beneficiaries (US$1.7 million)
25. This subcomponent will support additional services for those SEP businesses with higher
potential to expand. ‘Necessity entrepreneurs’—such as SEP beneficiaries—are often outside formal
access to finance markets. The objective of this subcomponent is to provide additional services and access
to further finance to promote business development for a small subset of SEP beneficiaries who have
higher prospects to grow their business beyond subsistence. It is expected that some of the businesses
supported by the SEP28 will maintain their livelihoods based on the sector of their in-kind transfer, some
will exit their lines of business, while others will grow and hire additional labor.29 In addition, this
subcomponent seeks to raise awareness on existing private sector pathways and pilot a small-scale
intervention addressing informational, knowledge, and financial constraints that may prevent high growth
potential SEP businesses to grow.
26. This subcomponent will support the piloting and evaluation of a set of services to expand the
businesses of some SEP beneficiaries. To this end, this subcomponent will invest in services that could
turn promising SEP micro-businesses into growing businesses. Promising SEP businesses will be identified
based on their business performance and plan to grow about 12 months after receiving the in-kind asset.
Specifically, the subcomponent will finance the following services for a few selected SEP businesses:
(a) Provision of additional funding as a matching grant of maximum amount AZN 3,500 for those
SEP beneficiaries who intend to expand their line of business based on adjudication of their
expansion business plans;
(b) Larger business award to be awarded based on a business plan competition where proposals
to scale up the business will be prepared, by the SEP beneficiaries, and evaluated;
(c) Provision of individual mentoring visits and advisory services during the first four months of
business operation focusing on relevant business skills and practices, including market
development and intelligence, as well as management capacity; and
(d) Provision of informational sessions on the existing financial instruments with a focus on
existing concessional loans (including the subsidized agro-credit programs run by the
Ministry of Agriculture), opportunities with the movable collateral registry, business
development services (such as those offered by the Small Business Development Agency),
and other debt opportunities that SEP beneficiaries can use to attract additional financing
to scale up their business.
27. The design of this subcomponent is centered around self-selecting promising SEP entrepreneurs
and providing them with an opportunity to avail additional support through a mechanism that is publicly
funded but mimics practices in the private sector. Across the life of the project, 280 SEP beneficiaries are
28 Successful SEP beneficiaries are mandated to register their income-generating activity as a business within two years from
receiving the in-kind asset.
29 This is currently a major constraint for micro and small and medium enterprises in Azerbaijan.
Page 16 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_21>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
expected to receive matching grants and about 8 will be awarded business awards. This corresponds to
approximately half of one percent of the total SEP beneficiaries supported by the project.
Subcomponent 1.3: Improving the governance and coordination mechanism of SEP (US$0.5 million)
28. The project will support improved governance and coordination arrangements of the SEP
implementation. To this end, the project will finance the following:
(a) Introducing innovative information and communication technology solutions to streamline
access to the SEP through a dedicated beneficiary support portal and mobile app. These
services will allow for online application to the program and facilitate subsequent interaction
with SEP case officers (SEPCOs);
(b) Training the SES staff for improved engagement modalities with clients as well as improved
selection of beneficiaries with a special focus on working with vulnerable groups and
technical and social support to clients;
(c) Strengthening outreach and the selection process for the SEP (targeting) in local SES centers,
particularly for women to increase their participation in the SEP;
(d) Improving the coordination between the TSSA and SEP through the development of a TSSA
graduation strategy and trainings provided for welfare office frontline staff; and
(e) Upgrading the SES management information system (MIS) to improve the monitoring and
performance management of the programs as well as the analysis of the SEP beneficiary
data.
29. The selection of beneficiaries will be based on the existing jobseeker registry (approximately
200,000 unemployed as of end-2019), with an explicit (but not exclusive) targeting of jobseekers from the
categories of vulnerable individuals: youth, women, IDPs, and beneficiaries of the TSSA program. An
assessment of the country personal data protection policies and the MLSPP’s data systems will be
conducted during implementation to identify gaps. The objective will be to put in place a framework for
protecting personal data used in the program and strengthening the IT governance and capacity, as well
as to ensure that project personal data related activities are carried out in accordance with international
best practices.30
Component 2: Strengthening employment services and programs (US$2 million)
30. The objective of Component 2 is to improve the SES’ capacity to perform its core tasks including
clients’ assessment, counseling, job matching, and referral to appropriate employment programs. It also
aims to support the MLSPP’s efforts to expand and improve the VTCs. Beneficiaries of this component are
30 International Best Practice consists of the following: (i) (a) ensure the rights of individuals with respect to the fair and legitimate
processing of their data, including that the purpose of collection and use of data are known to those individuals, (b) only that
data which is necessary for the stated purposed are collected and used, (c) data be retained only for so long as is necessary for
such purpose, and (d) individuals whose data is collected and used have the right to ensure the confidentiality and accuracy of
that data, and (ii) data processors (a) take such measures as are necessary to ensure the security of such data and that such data
are processed transparently, (b) undertake not to transfer such data to third parties without the consent of those individuals, and
(c) provide procedures and mechanisms to enable the rights described above.
Page 17 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_22>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
the inactive and unemployed registered with the SES, with a focus on women, youth, IDPs, and the TSSA
beneficiaries. This component complements the first component in achieving the overall objective of the
project as it will allow the SES to adequately segment SES clients between the SEP and other employment
programs. Some SES clients might not have the skills or motivation required for entrepreneurship and
would therefore be better served through other forms of assistance. The SES is also expected to play a
very important role in mediating labor market inclusion of able-bodied poor and vulnerable adult
beneficiaries of the TSSA program. Thus, the SES should strengthen its outreach services to vulnerable
populations and offer flexible programs and multiple services to address this groups’ diverse needs. To
this end, Component 2 covers the introduction of a case management approach in the SES. Furthermore,
to perform its job-matching task, the SES needs to understand the skills of jobseekers and skills demanded
by employers. Component 2 will support developing necessary tools and capacity-building activities
related to exploring and updating this kind of information. Another technical support activity under
Component 2 is the development of a strategy for expansion and improvement of the VTCs to allow the
MLSPP to increase its VTC capacity in a sustainable and high-quality manner.
Subcomponent 2.1: Labor market assessment and development of a VTC strategy (US$0.7 million)
31. This subcomponent will support the SES in assessing and responding to short- and medium-
term skills demanded by employers. To this end, the subcomponent will finance a comprehensive labor
market assessment to improve the SES’ capacity to identify critical occupations and skills most demanded
by employers. The results of the labor market demand analysis will help scale up the menu of employment
services and ALMPs offered to support jobseekers. In this regard, this subcomponent will also finance
technical analysis and quantitative/qualitative surveys. It is expected that the SES will regularly update
this analysis to meet the changing needs of the labor market. The subcomponent will finance the SES’
staff capacity-building activities such as staff training, producing user manuals, and so on to enable them
to regularly update the analysis on their own in the future.
32. The subcomponent will also finance the development of a strategy for expansion and
improvement of the VTCs. The strategy will involve all aspects necessary for the development of efficient
and effective VTCs, spanning physical infrastructure standards to training module
development/improvement guidelines to ensure the relevance of curricula and qualification offered to
labor market needs. This activity is complementary to the market demand analysis mentioned earlier.
Outputs of the labor market demand analysis will serve as inputs for this activity.
Subcomponent 2.2: Outreach, profiling, skills assessment, and case management for jobseekers (US$1.3
million)
33. This subcomponent will deliver further activities to improve job matching rates in SES. The
project will finance the following:
(a) Development and rollout of a communication and outreach strategy targeting both the
inactive and unregistered population as well as firms;
(b) Development of a statistical jobseeker profiling tool and a skills assessment test for
jobseekers;
Page 18 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_23>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
(c) Development of online instruments to integrate the profiling tool and skills assessment to
the SES MIS;
(d) Development and introduction of a case management model in the SES; and
(e) Production of user manuals and training materials and the delivery of SES staff training in
using these instruments.
34. To address the low rate of economic activity among women in Azerbaijan, outreach activities will
be tailored to suit inactive females, with a view to increase their registration with the SES as jobseekers.
Case management approaches will also be developed with a view to respond to gender-specific labor
market barriers (for example, care responsibilities or transportation constraints). To this end, gender
sensitivity trainings will be organized for a subset of the SES job counselors.
35. To serve difficult-to-reach populations and increase the number of registered vacancies in the
SES, communication and outreach activities are essential. This activity will ensure that employers and
vulnerable jobseekers are aware of SES services and are encouraged to participate. In addition,
implementation of outreach and communication activities to hard-to-serve populations and employers
will allow the SES to expand the coverage of vulnerable jobseekers, many of whom are now excluded, and
employers. This will be achieved through (a) developing a communication and outreach strategy and (b)
implementing it at the local level.
36. Once the SES reaches a more diverse population, it needs to segment clients based on their
employability. Counseling and employment programs that will be provided to jobseekers should depend
on their skills and needs. This activity aims to develop skills profiling and assessment tools and support
the capacity of the SES to employ those tools.
37. The project will also support the development of a case management approach in the SES. The
SES is expected to tailor its package of employment support services to beneficiaries, particularly those
who are difficult to serve. To this end, the component will include the development of a case management
approach which will include needs and skills assessment for at-risk jobseekers, referrals to counseling and
job search assistance, skills training, and/or placement in on-the-job training or job placement services
that are customized to the maximum extent to the needs of the individuals. The results of profiling and
skills assessment tools will provide inputs for the individual service strategy that will be implemented
under the case management.
Component 3: Project management, monitoring, and evaluation (US$2.5 million)
38. The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of the MLSPP to implement the
proposed project and use M&E data on labor market interventions that the ministry implements,
including through the SES. This component will inform evidence-based policy making by providing the
Government with a strengthened M&E system. This system will be a critical input to labor policy decisions
in the future.
Page 19 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_24>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
Subcomponent 3.1: Project management (US$1.3 million)
39. This subcomponent will finance a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in the MLSPP to manage
the overall project. The PIU will be responsible for the procurement, financial management, social and
environmental requirements, as well as monitoring and regularly reporting on the implementation of the
three components, in compliance with World Bank fiduciary and reporting requirements. This
subcomponent will finance consultants’ fees for the PIU staff, equipment (including IT related) and
software as necessary for project management, and operational costs. It will also finance the required
annual financial and technical audits of the project.
Subcomponent 3.2: Monitoring and evaluation (US$1.2 million)
40. This subcomponent will support the MLSPP to strengthen its M&E system to better track project
implementation and monitor key labor market interventions. This will ensure that programs’ operations
follow expected design and procedures, receive systematic and organized feedback from beneficiaries
and employers, and assess key labor market interventions to foster a positive feedback loop into policy
making and program design updates. The proposed activities under this subcomponent and
Subcomponent 2.2 will be carried out in accordance with international best practices.
41. Specifically, the M&E capacity will be strengthened at three levels: SEP, SES, and ministerial.
• At the program level, the subcomponent will finance (a) upgrading of data collection
capabilities of the SEP module in the existing MIS system, (b) two process evaluations of the
SEP operations during Year 2 and 3/4 of the project, and (c) an impact evaluation of the SEP
in Year 3 of the project.31
• At the SES level, the subcomponent will finance (a) the development of a software to
generate key statistics on SES activities and outcomes; (b) two annual tracer studies of
trajectories of jobseekers placed through the SES; (c) regular training for SES staff to improve
data collection and analysis skills (including specialized training on large database,
cybersecurity, personal data protection, and IT management); and (d) an employer
satisfaction survey to collect their feedback on the SES’ services and programs .
• At the ministry level, the subcomponent will (a) support the development of a sectoral
Results Framework; (b) improve the capacity of the MLSPP Department of Employment
Policy and Demography to generate knowledge and analysis for evidence-based decision
making through training (including specialized training on large database, cybersecurity,
personal data protection, and IT management); (c) develop the concept, operational
guidelines, and the MIS module for a grievance redressal mechanism (GRM) system for the
SES; and (d) conduct two project beneficiary assessment surveys in Year 2 and 4 of the
project of a sample of registered jobseekers (including beneficiaries of the SEP).
31 Persons receiving state targeted social aid, PWDs, children under the age of 18, persons registered as unemployed for more
than one year, persons having less than two years until retirement, and unemployed persons released from places of detention
are given preference in the organization of the self-employment of unemployed people.
Page 20 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_25>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
C. Project Beneficiaries
42. Primary beneficiaries of the project are vulnerable groups in Azerbaijan. Vulnerable people are
defined in accordance with the Law on Employment as beneficiaries of the TSSA program, IDPs, refugees,
women, youth, PWDs, long-term unemployed, individuals with less than two years until retirement, and
former convicts.32 The project will target in particular four of these groups: the TSSA beneficiaries, IDPs,
women, and youth who are either inactive or unemployed registered with the SES. Employment refers to
both self-employment and wage employment.
43. Beneficiaries of Components 1 and 2 are unemployed people registered with the SES.
Component 1 targets vulnerable individuals identified as ‘priority groups’ by legislation33 with a focus on
women, youth, the TSSA beneficiaries, and IDPs. To address gender gaps in activity and employment, the
project will encourage preferred participation of women in activities under both components through
quotas (to be agreed and specified in the Project Operations Manual [POM]).
44. Component 2 will further benefit the inactive and employees at risk of losing their jobs. The
component will pay special attention to existing workers at risk of losing their jobs and in need of being
retrained. Appropriate outreach efforts—live and online—will ensure that all beneficiaries targeted by
the project will be reached and properly informed.
D. Results Chain
45. Against its development objective, the project aims to address unemployment and inactivity
among vulnerable individuals by expanding the SEP and providing a strengthened and more diverse set
of services to SEP beneficiaries, as well as by improving the capacity of the SES to help workable individuals
access job opportunities. To this end, the project aims to achieve the following key outcomes:
• Increased share of SEP businesses in operation 24 months after the asset transfer, by
vulnerable group
• Increased employment rate among registered unemployed, by vulnerable group
46. To achieve the first outcome, the project will provide in-kind assets to promote a diversified
menu of income-generating activities through an improved targeting, skills training, and individualized
approach. The project will support improved business trainings (incorporating psycho-motivational and
financial literacy modules) for the SEP beneficiaries, technical skills development, and a dedicated
network of experts/mentors to provide business support to SEP beneficiaries during the first critical
months of launching their business. These activities will allow the Government to maximize the impacts
of the SEP by enabling beneficiaries to make best use of the assets, especially in the service and production
sectors, and improving their profitability and sustainability over time, hence generating longer term
employment. For a selected group of SEP beneficiaries with high potential to grow, the project will pilot
interventions to boost the expansion of their businesses. Information sessions on access to finance and
32 The definition is in accordance with Article 24.9 of the Law on Employment (No 1196-VQ, adopted on June 29, 2019) of the
Republic of Azerbaijan.
33 Azerbaijan’s Law on Employment defines vulnerable groups as women, youth, IDPs, individuals with disabilities, former
convicts, and the TSSA beneficiaries.
Page 21 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_26>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
business support will further increase the likelihood of business survival. SES employment services and
programs will better serve vulnerable registered jobseekers through improved tools for profiling
jobseekers, improved case management approaches, improved understanding of the skills in demand,
and strategic realignment of upgraded VTCs, as well as better communication and outreach with
beneficiaries on SES programs. These tools will enable the SES to improve job matching between
employers and registered vacancies with employers’ needs and provide an improved menu of services
and programs for vulnerable jobseekers, eventually improving the share of poor and vulnerable
individuals in jobs after participating in SES-administered programs.
Figure 1. Project Results Chain
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners
47. Azerbaijan faces the challenge of fostering inclusive job creation, which the World Bank is well
positioned to support. This involves expanding access to jobs and income-generating opportunities for
vulnerable individuals (women, youth, poor individuals as proxied by the TSSA beneficiaries, and IDPs)
who are disadvantaged in the labor market because of lower education, limited access to information,
cultural norms, family responsibilities, and mobility constraints among others. There is growing
momentum for investments in economic inclusion programs that strengthen inclusive and sustainable
growth building on the success of ‘graduation programs’ worldwide. Graduation programs—providing a
package of interventions spanning cash transfers, financial inclusion, livelihoods, coaching, and
empowerment—were first pioneered by the Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee in Bangladesh
and promoted globally by the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor and the Ford Foundation. Since 2002,
graduation programs have been implemented in more than 40 countries. In the longer term, investing in
people to build human capital through a World Bank engagement will increase the country’s productivity
Page 22 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_27>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
and growth prospects through better health and education systems and work-based learning
opportunities. To this end, equalizing access to income-generating opportunities through the SEP and
access to formal job opportunities through improved SES services will be instrumental in promoting
economic inclusion and addressing existing labor market disparities in the country.
48. While recent social protection reform achievements have been significant, considerable work
still needs to be done to ensure that the social protection and labor system is inclusive of those in need,
promotes human capital formation, and provides access to productive jobs. The World Bank and the
Government of Azerbaijan have jointly identified the following areas of collaboration: (a) further reform
of the social protection system, including policies and service delivery mechanisms; (b) reform of labor
market institutions, including labor policy formulation, the SEP, and other employment services; (c)
reform of the VTCs under the MLSPP; and (d) reform of the policy and interventions for the protection
and inclusion of vulnerable groups. This reform agenda would contribute to improving economic and
social gains and savings for citizens and the Government by lowering transaction costs for receiving timely
information and accessing benefits; better targeting of benefits; and effective job training, placement,
search, and analysis of labor markets.
49. The World Bank’s engagement will capitalize on experiences with innovative practices for social
protection and jobs reform to upgrade Azerbaijan’s labor system. The current design of the SEP relies on
outdated information systems and beneficiary engagement approaches and technology. Based on its
experience in implementing social protection and jobs interventions in other countries (in the region and
globally) the World Bank is uniquely positioned to introduce innovative solutions in Azerbaijan. To this
end, the project will finance (a) the upgrading and streamlining of the existing online beneficiary portal
and (b) the introduction of a mobile application for SEP applicants and beneficiaries. Both these activities
will make the SEP more streamlined and user friendly and will facilitate interaction between the SEPCOs
and applicants or beneficiaries.
50. The World Bank is collaborating with several partners to strengthen the social protection
system in the country. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) is currently piloting an
intervention under the umbrella of the SEP that is specifically targeted toward PWDs. Over 2019–2024,
the UNDP plans to assist 2,500 PWDs by tailoring the SEP interventions to international best practices.
Individuals receive the equivalent of up to AZN 9,000 through in-kind asset transfers. In the course of
project preparation, the World Bank team has drawn on the experience of several other development
partners. The EU twinning project has provided recent diagnostic studies related to operational and
institutional aspects of the SES: the findings of this work directly benefited the design of Component 2.
The ILO—which first piloted the self-employment intervention in Azerbaijan—provided details and inputs
related to trainings and monitoring arrangements that have been incorporated in Component 1. Going
forward, the task will be closely coordinated with these agencies to ensure synergies and continuous
learning from ongoing initiatives.
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design
51. Programs supporting livelihood and entrepreneurship are important policy instruments to
boost the income of poor and vulnerable people by addressing labor market constraints related to limited
Page 23 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_28>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
labor demand and by addressing financial and nonfinancial34 constraints impeding their economic
inclusion. Self-employment is the predominant form of economic activity and source of jobs in low- and
middle-income countries.35 While most of these self-employment activities do not ever grow beyond
subsistence size, they represent the main source of income for the poor and vulnerable and, in some
cases, a first step to evolve into growing businesses.
52. Entrepreneurship programs that address both financial and nonfinancial constraints work
better for the poor and vulnerable people (potential entrepreneurs), given their multiple constraints.
Global evidence shows that entrepreneurship programs addressing multiple constraints, hence combining
business and technical skills development with financial support (in the form of either microloans, cash,
or in kind transfers) and complementary services, have stronger impacts on business start-up and
profitability than stand-alone interventions like microcredit, as access to finance may not be the binding
constraint for many entrepreneurs.36 Programs targeting vulnerable people require a multifaceted
approach because poor and vulnerable people tend to face multiple challenges—in addition to lack of
start-up capital either monetary of physical—including ones that are not financial in nature (for example,
social) which require complementary services.37 In addition, evidence from Chile and Mexico
demonstrates that providing a comprehensive service package consisting of start-up capital, training, and
follow-up visits has positive impacts on firm productivity, number of employees of firms, and wage
employment of the self-employed in the long run.38
53. The SEP in Azerbaijan—combining business training with in-kind assets provision—is an
example of a ‘graduation program’ targeted to poor and vulnerable people that has demonstrated
promising impacts on income and asset generation. The graduation approach consists of a sequenced
set of interventions (small cash transfers, in-kind asset transfer, business training, and coaching support
for two years) aimed at tackling the multifaceted constraints faced by the poorest and most vulnerable
households. The graduation into sustainable livelihoods approach following the Bangladesh Rural
Advancement Committee model has increasingly been adapted and implemented in low- and middle-
34 Financial constraints include prohibitively high interest rates and collateral requirements for vulnerable groups, while
nonfinancial constraints encompass the absence of business knowledge, practices, and management capital; limited access to
markets (value chains), networks, and mobility; and other factors.
35 Ayyagari, M. Demirguc-Kunt. 2014. “Who Creates Jobs in Developing Countries”, Small Business Economics, Vol. 43(1), pp.75-
99; Haltiwanger et al. 2013.: “Who Creates Jobs? Small versus Large versus Young”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.
14(2), OPP. 347-361
36 Cho and Honorati. 2014. “Entrepreneurship Programs in Developing Countries: A Meta Regression Analysis.” Labor Economics
28: 110–130; Blattman and Ralston. 2015. “Generating Employment in Poor and Fragile States: Evidence from Labor Market and
Entrepreneurship Programs.” Working Paper; and Kluve et al. 2016. “Do Youth Employment Program Improve Labor Market
Outcomes: A Systematic Review.” Discussion Paper 10263, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA), Bonn.
37 World Bank projects that take into account a combined approach include, among others, the Employment Support Project for
Syrians Under Temporary Protection and Turkish Citizens (P161670); Development of Business and Entrepreneurship for Syrians
under Temporary Protection and Turkish Citizens Project (P168731) in Turkey; the MNA Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprise
Financing Facility” (P124341) in Tunisia; the Women's Economic Empowerment Rural Development Project (P164443); the Rural
Enterprise Development Program (P110407) in Afghanistan; and Creating Economic Opportunities in Support of the Lebanon
National Jobs Program (PforR) (P163576) have provided relevant lessons.
38 Bruhn, M., Karlan, D., and Schoar, A. 2018. “The Impact of Consulting Services on Small and Medium Enterprises: Evidence from
a Randomized Trial in Mexico”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol.126(2): 635 - 687; Martínez A., C., Puentes,E. and Ruiz-Tagle,
J. 2018. "The Effects of Micro-entrepreneurship Programs on Labor Market Performance: Experimental Evidence from
Chile.", American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 10 (2): 101-24.
Page 24 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_29>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
income countries (currently serving about 14 million people in total).39 Rigorous impact evaluations across
six countries have demonstrated promising impacts on income and asset generation, poverty reduction,
and food security40. The study argues that, despite the sizable unit cost of the program, the program would
have benefits of between 1.3 and 4.3 times the expenditure. Bedoya et al. (2019)41 provide a significant
contribution to the effectiveness of graduation programs in a fragile and conflict setting through the study
in Afghanistan.
54. The variations and proposed complementary interventions to the SEP supported by the project
build on lessons learned from similar programs and impact evaluations. Success factors that will be taken
into account to strengthen the current deign of the SEP include (a) the need for regular coaching and face-
to-face visits during the first months after business creation provided by experts; (b) quality assurance for
the business training; (c) entrepreneurial attitude matters for success, not just a sound business plan; (d)
the need to strengthen technical skills for nonfarming-related activities; (e) provision of access to
networks; and (f) provision of links to business development services for beneficiaries who have higher
potential to grow. The design of the proposed activities under Component 1 (mentoring visits, enhanced
business training including psycho-based elements building an entrepreneurial mindset, and pooling
incentives) reflect lessons learned from projects42 and impact evaluations.43
55. Evidence on the success of entrepreneurship support programs (for existing entrepreneurs) on
business performance and sustainability is mixed. Part of the problem is that the entrepreneurs are a
heterogeneous group: some are innovative entrepreneurs with growth potential and ambitions,44
whereas others are there by necessity (Schoar 2010).45 This suggests that the impacts may depend on
characteristics or attitudes of the entrepreneur, and that the targeting of business development services
is critical for interventions to be cost-effective. Subcomponent 1.2 proposes to provide referrals to existing
concessional loans, financial and business support services (managed by other ministries), and a subset of
SEP beneficiaries who are identified as potential high-growth entrepreneurs (or ‘gazelles’) with the ability
to expand their business size over time.
39 World Bank. 2018. 2018 State of the Sector Synthesis Report. Partnership for Economic Inclusion. Washington, D.C.: World
Bank Group.
40 Banerjee, A et al. 2015. “A Multi-faceted Program Causes Lasting Progress for the Very Poor: Evidence from Six Countries.”
Science, Vol. 348(6236); Bedoya, G. 2019. “No Household Left Behind: Afghanistan targeting the Ultra Poor Impact Evaluation”,
Policy Research Working Paper No. 8877, World Bank Group, Washington, D.C.
41 Bedoya 2019.
42 Innovative Startups Fund Project (P161905) in Jordan, Financing Innovative Startups and SMEs Project (P150928) in Morocco,
Catalyzing Entrepreneurship for Job Creation Project (P162835) in Egypt, Enhancing Access to Finance for Micro and Small
Enterprises Project in Egypt (P116011), and Innovation and SME Growth Project (P127306) in Lebanon.
43 Blattman, C. 2014. “Generating Skilled Self-Employment in Developing Countries: Experimental Evidence from Uganda”;
McKenzie, D., Woodruff, C., de Mel, S. 2012. “One-Time Transfers of Cash or Capital Have Long-Lasting Effects on
Microenterprises in Sri Lanka”; Fafchamps, M. and Quinn, S. 2015. “Networks and Manufacturing Firms in Africa: Results from a
Randomized Field Experiment”, NBER working paper 21132; Klinger, B., Schuendeln, M. 2011. “Can Entrepreneurial Activity be
Taught? Quasi-Experimental Evidence from Central America”, World Development, Vol. 39(9); McKenzie, D. 2015. “Identifying
and Spurring High-Growth Entrepreneurship: Experimental Evidence from a Business Plan Competition.”
44 The degree of growth potential and ambitions, of course, varies. For example, according to the Global Entrepreneurship
Monitor 2010 Global Report (Kelley et al. 2011), around 75 percent of new entrepreneurs, on average, do not expect to grow
their business to more than four workers.
45 Schoar, A. 2010. “The Divide between Subsistence and Transformational Entrepreneurship”, NBER Working Paper No. 11765.
Page 25 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_30>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
56. Female entrepreneurs require tailored support approaches. Integrating women into
entrepreneurship activities requires gender-sensitive approaches, hand-holding, and networking,
especially with local communities, as demonstrated by an innovative pilot to provide self-employment
opportunities to rural women through business collectives that focus on entrepreneurship implemented
under AzRIP-2.46 The main lessons learned from this pilot demonstrate that on-site business incubation
and support services are key to sustainability and scaling up of rural women’s enterprises, and that peer-
to-peer support and mentoring provide an affordable avenue for on-the-ground support. The pilot also
demonstrated that women living in rural areas are most comfortable with food processing- or tailoring-
related businesses, and allowing them to start their business in areas familiar to them and subsequently
providing support to diversify into more sophisticated ventures (such as agribusiness and services) will
increase their chances of success. These lessons are reflected in Subcomponents 1.1. and 1.2, which
upgrade the choice of assets available to SEP participants to better tailor the program to women
entrepreneurs.
57. PESs need to be able to respond to multiple—often overlapping—employment barriers.
International literature as well as insights derived from other World Bank projects point out several best
practices for the operation of a PES that will guide the capacity building and staff training provided under
the project. Lessons from the Portraits of Labor Market Exclusion 2.0 (P153368) and Improving
Employability for Inclusive Growth in Hungary (P163580) analytical tasks demonstrate that people who
are unemployed, inactive, or precariously employed make up a very diverse group, and employment
barriers – e.g. low skills, limited work experience, care responsibilities – tend to appear simultaneously.
Project activities will therefore promote that employment service approaches in the SES recognize and
respond to this diversity. These lessons are reflected in Component 2 of the project which provides
technical assistance and capacity building to PESs to increase their ability to place clients in the job market.
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
58. The project will be implemented under the leadership of the MLSPP. The MLSPP is responsible
for developing employment policies and monitoring their implementation, as well as the implementation
of the means-tested TSSA program (which the proposed project is expected to better link with the SEP).
Implementation will be supported by a PIU to be established within the MLSPP and will operate with the
close involvement of the Employment Policy Department and the SES reporting to the MLSPP.
59. The project will be implemented by the network of local SES centers under the MLSPP. The key
implementing body of the program will be local offices of the SES, while trainings will be delivered with
46 This is a group entrepreneurship model (neighborhood groups of 10 to 20 women) started in March 2018. AzRIP-2 included an
innovative pilot to provide self-employment to rural women through business collectives that focus on entrepreneurship. The
level of success achieved in less than a year pointed to the need for investing in opportunities for rural women and in their skill
development and unleashing their potential. See Wrobel, R. 2018. “Azerbaijan - Third Rural Investment Project: Using Technology
for Development”, Washington, D.C., World Bank.
Page 26 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_31>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
the involvement of VTCs under the MLSPP. The project will leverage existing local coordination
arrangements47 at the level of rayons for advisory and consultative purposes.
60. The project management structure will involve (a) a Steering Group led by the MLSPP and
involving the SES and the PIU that will meet quarterly to take stock of project implementation, discuss any
deviations, and take action (if needed); representatives of the private sectors will also be part of the
committee and (b) a Working Group led by the PIU and involving other relevant sectoral counterparts (for
example, Ministry of Economy, Ministry of Agriculture, and the SSC).
61. The PIU will be responsible for procurement, disbursement, monitoring, and reporting on the
use of loan proceeds. The PIU will include a director for this operation, who would have overall
responsibility for the implementation of the proposed project on the ministry’s side. Given the complexity
and multisectoral feature of the project design, the PIU would also include at least two sector specialists,
one focusing on self-employment and another on labor market programs. Further specialists on
procurement, financial management, M&E, and environmental and social safeguards should also be hired
by the PIU. The PIU will also hire consultants, business trainers, and mentors, who will be providing
technical and business support to SEP beneficiaries. Implementation arrangements will ensure continuous
strengthening of the MLSPP’s capacity to promote long-term sustainability of the reforms.
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
62. The PDO-level and intermediate results indicators will be monitored using the following sources
and methodologies: (a) data collected through the MIS supported by the project, (b) regular data
collection processes, (c) process evaluations, (d) an impact evaluation after Year 3, and (e) M&E
assessments. The proposed data source, frequency, and responsibilities are outlined in the Results
Framework. The POM will further clarify the monitoring protocols for each indicator. The targets and
baselines of each indicator will be discussed and updated, together with the counterpart, during the
appraisal mission, while considering the lessons learned and context.
63. The project will provide institutional support and training to help the Government in developing
and implementing a strong M&E framework and system. The proposed project would support continued
building of the MLSPP M&E capacity to better track program implementation, monitor key labor
market interventions, and evaluate policy and programs based on the systematic and organized feedback
from beneficiaries and the use of the MIS data. The PIU will be responsible for gathering the relevant
reports and information from the MLSPP representatives and other relevant parties involved in project
implementation to monitor the project Results Framework and for communicating with the World Bank
according to the frequency of reports to be described in the project’s Monitoring and Evaluation Plan. The
PDO indicators include two outcome-level indicators to document the outcomes of activities supported
by the project. A number of intermediate results indicators will be used to track periodic progress toward
achieving the PDO. Day-to-day M&E duties will be carried out by the PIU’s M&E specialist who will
coordinate all M&E activities.
64. To support strengthening the capacity for M&E, Component 3.2 will support (a) the upgrade of
functionalities of the SEP electronic and automated MIS; (b) the development of data analytics; (c) two
47 The Regulation of Local Employment Centre of State Employment Service, Attachment No. 2. paragraph 7.5.1, requires that
local SES centers discuss measures and activities with the local self-government bodies, to tackle unemployment.
Page 27 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_32>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
process evaluations of the SEP, (d) an impact evaluation of the SEP; (e) at the SES level: development of
software for improved data analysis, training of SES staff, and tracer studies; and (f) at the MLSPP level:
development of performance indicators, training of staff for improved evidence-based decision making,
development of guidelines and a GRM system for complaints management, and beneficiary assessment
surveys.
C. Sustainability
65. Project sustainability is supported through the Government’s vision on the role of self-
employment in activation and employment support policies. Since the 2016 presidential decree on self-
employment, the MLSPP has been gradually scaling up the SEP in 2018. The Government invested AZN
35.8 million from the Unemployment Insurance Fund to provide in-kind assets for self-employment
activities (each worth up to AZN 7,000) to close to 8,000 beneficiaries and has committed to increasing
this number to 10,000 by the end of 2019. Self-employment receives a prominent role in the
Government’s Employment Strategy, which sets out a vision of ‘lower dependence’ on social benefits and
allowances and encourages transition from the TSSA to integration into the labor market. To this end, the
strategy envisions the expansion of the scope of measures to support self-employment.
66. Activities funded by the project build institutional capacity in a sustainable manner. The project
will focus on strengthening the system of self-employment through investments in governance,
coordination, and implementation subsystems with a view to support the expansion and improve
effectiveness, of the program. Moreover, a substantial share of project activities is focused on capacity
building, training, and technical assistance to enhance capacity at the MLSPP and SES, both at the central
and local levels. This approach is intended to ensure that programs, interventions, and other activities
supported by the project are sustainable and, as appropriate, scalable after the implementation period of
the operation closes. The proposed project will further support improving the efficiency of the program
through improved targeting and lower administrative costs. Through improved targeting of vulnerable
groups, financing becomes more efficient, and more funds will become available to expand the program
to more poor people.
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY
A. Technical, Economic, and Financial Analysis (if applicable)
67. Entrepreneurship and employment support programs and services are key instruments for
improving the labor market outcomes among groups of vulnerable people. Programs supporting self-
employment and entrepreneurship are important policy instruments to boost the income of the poor and
vulnerable, for whom self-employment can be a key source of income. Such programs help address lack
of labor demand and, more specifically, financial and nonfinancial constraints. Existing evidence from
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and EU member states suggests that
well-designed activation programs can have a positive impact on employment outcomes for program
participants, including those who are recipients of income support. The evidence also indicates that
activation and employment support programs tend to produce modest positive results in a cost-effective
manner. The effectiveness of such programs tends to be hindered by high levels of informality, rural and
immobile target populations, and low labor demand due to macroeconomic conditions. Effective
employment promotion programs are generally aligned with the requirements of the authorizing
Page 28 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_33>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
environment, including domestic policy challenges, employment opportunities, and institutional capacity;
solid understanding of the needs and requirements of current and prospective clients of activation
interventions; and choices of appropriate incentives along with policy instruments.
68. The proposed project is therefore expected to yield measurable benefits. The project is expected
to increase the share of the TSSA beneficiaries and other vulnerable groups either in self-employment or
in employment, providing pathways to productive (self-)employment activities and, in the long run,
although beyond the scope of this project, contribute to improved living standards overall.
69. The costs associated with the improvements of employment services and programs are
expected to be offset by sustainable impacts. The SEP implementation costs are currently estimated to
be approximately AZN 7,000 for beneficiaries operating in the production and services sectors. The
activities carried out under this project are expected to increase the costs of SEP implementation due to
the additional complementary activities to strengthen program effectiveness. While the unit costs will be
higher, the net present value (NPV) of impacts in terms of longer-term income-generating activities and
sustainable income flows is expected to exceed the costs. Under a three-year benefit accrual scenario,
Component 1 of the World Bank-funded project would lead to a benefit-cost ratio of 99 percent
(estimated net benefits of AZN 7,097 per beneficiary) compared to the MLSPP-funded program’s baseline
of 55 percent (estimated net benefits of AZN 3,863). Under a seven-year benefit accrual scenario, the
World Bank intervention will yield a benefit-cost ratio of 168 percent (or AZN 12,089 net benefits per
beneficiary) versus the MLSPP baseline of 75 percent (or AZN 5,253 of net benefits per beneficiary), which
is the equivalent of an additional AZN 150 million in net benefits (over the MLSPP program). Annex 3
provides a detailed cost-benefit analysis of Component 1.
70. The higher benefit-cost ratio is due to the higher cost of improving training and mentoring for
beneficiaries. These activities more than paid for themselves, as beneficiaries have higher business
survival rates and higher returns from their entrepreneurial activities. Project activities will also improve
the effectiveness of selected labor market programs that in turn are expected to lead to higher job
placements and eventually lower unemployment periods for beneficiaries, with a resulting positive impact
on household consumption.
B. Fiduciary
(i) Financial Management
71. The financial management arrangements for the project are acceptable to the World Bank, and
they will be further strengthened through the finalization of the financial part of the POM. The MLSPP
will oversee overall implementation of the project, and the PIU to be established within the MLSPP will
assume financial management responsibilities for the project and will be the focal point for reporting to
the World Bank. A full set of unaudited interim financial reports (IFRs) will be submitted to the World Bank
quarterly throughout the life of the project. The reports will incorporate detailed information on amounts
transferred to the MLSPP from the Designated Account, amounts transferred to the beneficiaries, and any
unused funds which were transferred from the Designated Account. Separately procured software will be
used for project accounting and reporting. The software should prove solid performance on financial
transparency and reliability of the project data. The annual audited project financial statements will be
provided to the World Bank within six months of the end of each fiscal year and at the closing of the
project.
Page 29 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_34>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
72. Appropriate internal controls and flow of funds arrangements designed and instituted within
the MLSPP will be used for the project. These are essential in ensuring proper controls and monitoring of
the flow of funds and will ensure that the funds will flow only to the entitled beneficiaries and for intended
purposes. Appropriate checks and evidence are instituted as requirements to provide reasonable
assurance in this respect. The respective controls and procedures are described in annex 2 and detailed
in the financial part of the POM for the project.
73. The overall financial management risk is assessed to be Substantial, and with adequate
mitigation measures the risk is moderate, due to the complexity and specifics of the project.
(ii) Procurement
74. Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank’s ‘Procurement Regulations
for IPF Borrowers: Procurement in Investment Project Financing Goods, Works, Non‐Consulting and
Consulting Services’, dated July 1, 2016, and revised in November 2017 and August 2018. A Project
Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD) based on market analysis has been developed. A detailed
Procurement Plan has been prepared for the first 18 months of the project implementation based on the
PPSD’s outcome. Project procurement communication and Procurement Plan implementation will be
performed through the Systemic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) system.
75. Procurement is planned to be conducted by the MLSPP/PIU who will be responsible for all
procurements under the project. Though the MLSPP had experience in implementing World Bank-funded
projects and had past working exposure to the World Bank’s old Procurement Guidelines, the MLSPP has
no experience in the World Bank Procurement Regulations which is effective since July 1, 2016. The MLSPP
will be responsible for few moderate value goods and consultancy contracts with international
competition following World Bank Procurement Regulations, which needs relevant expertise. Considering
these factors, the procurement risk rating is assessed as ‘Substantial’. It has been agreed that the MLSPP
will assign a staff as a procurement focal person for the project. In addition to that, the MLSPP will ensure
full-time dedicated service of an experienced procurement consultant throughout the project life. Once
the PIU is formed, the World Bank will arrange customized procurement training on the Procurement
Framework, including the PPSD and STEP (details of procurement arrangements are mentioned under
annex 2).
. C. Legal Operational Policies
.
Triggered?
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No
Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No
.
D. Environmental and Social
76. The environmental risk of the project is rated Moderate because project activities will not cause
environmental risk or affect human population and environment. The social risk is rated Moderate
reflecting (a) significant political and governance risks outlined in the project concept note; (b) the
required analysis of a broad range of social issues, including measures for improving beneficiary targeting;
Page 30 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_35>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
(c) the capacity-building support to the client for effective stakeholder engagement; and (d) support for
Environmental and Social Standards 2 and the overall Environmental and Social Framework compliance
necessary for this project. Overall, the project does not have significant negative social impacts and the
project aims to improve employment opportunities among women, youth, the TSSA beneficiaries, and
IDPs who are either inactive or unemployed registered with the SES.
77. Citizen engagement. Local consultations with existing SEP beneficiaries as well as with potential
SEP participants—representatives of the TSSA beneficiaries and/or vulnerable groups (women, youth,
elderly, IDPs, PWDs)—have been conducted during the project preparation phase to strengthen the
design. Citizen engagement and accountability measures will be developed and mainstreamed in the
different project activities. Citizen engagement activities will include (a) periodical beneficiary satisfaction
surveys, (b) a dedicated online consultation portal for continuous collection of beneficiary feedback, and
(c) a participatory mechanism through local consultations to involve central and local stakeholders to
provide a consultative platform related to economic sectors priorities for SEP-financed businesses and
ensure local citizens’ engagement. The project will also establish a GRM with specific activities linked to
each component.
78. Disability inclusion. According to the MLSPP data, there are about 620,000 PWDs in Azerbaijan.
Approximately 14 percent of the current SEP beneficiaries are PWDs. As Component 1 of the proposed
project includes PWDs within its target group, the project is expected to directly contribute to the agenda
of labor market inclusion of PWDs in Azerbaijan, complementing the UNDP’s efforts to pilot SEP activities
that would be better tailored to serve PWDs.
79. Gender. Azerbaijan has a substantial gender gap in labor force participation of around 22
percentage points, and a high share (approximately 30 percent) of female youth are NEET. The high female
NEET rate could be a result of young women being on extended maternity leave, which is further
exacerbated by strong social norms for women to stay at home together with a lack of childcare
possibilities,48 leading to the gap. Gender gap in employment demonstrates strong intersectionality with
geography, with women being about 23 percent less likely to be employed in urban areas and about 17
percent less likely in rural areas. Finally, there is a considerable gender wage gap: women in urban and
rural areas can expect to earn about 50 percent less than men. The project is expected to contribute to
narrowing the gap between men and women’s labor force participation through both participation in the
SEP as well as in other programs implemented by the SES. To this end, specific actions outlined in (a)
Subcomponent 1.3 will focus on strengthening outreach and application in local SES centers, particularly
for women to increase their participation in the SEP and (b) Subcomponent 2.2 will support tailored
outreach activities targeting inactive females, with a view to increase their registration with the SES as
jobseekers and will support gender-sensitive case management approaches to consider labor market
barriers specific to women (for example, childcare responsibilities). Moreover, citizen engagement
activities described above will be designed to include consultations on gender issues related to access to
the SEP and employment services in general. Quantitative analysis carried out in the context of the project
will aim to identify and quantify specific constraints that women face in the labor market. Finally, the
project will establish data collection mechanisms to facilitate the monitoring of gender results and
impacts, with indicators disaggregated by gender, whenever possible.
48 World Bank 2019.
Page 31 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_36>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
80. Climate co-benefits. The potential to add adaptation co-benefits associated with the SEP is
assessed. Azerbaijan’s agricultural sector—where most of the SEP beneficiaries operate—is expected to
be affected by climate change through (a) increasing temperatures in all three agricultural regions, (b)
increasing variability of precipitation, (c) reduced river runoff, and (d) increased frequency and severity of
extreme weather events. The project design will respond to these challenges by offering a more diversified
set of options for the SEP beneficiaries to reduce the share of livestock-related businesses funded by the
SEP, as well as by incorporating key measures49 to address some of these issues, such as improved access
to agronomic technology (through technical training), links with financial sources, incentives to
consolidate the SEP business (agriculture) through cooperatives, and supporting agrobusiness activities
through the SEP.
V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES
81. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a World Bank
supported project may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or the
World Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly
reviewed in order to address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may
submit their complaint to the Bank’s independent Inspection Panel which determines whether harm
occurred, or could occur, as a result of World Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures.
Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the World Bank's
attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond.
VI. KEY RISKS
82. The overall project risk is Substantial given the political and governance risks as well as risks
associated with technical design, institutional capacity, and fiduciary management. An overview of risks
is presented in the following paragraphs.
83. Political and governance risks are Substantial. In the country, a new government set up after the
presidential elections in April 2018 introduced changes to the country’s key leadership positions and a
number of reforms in the financial sector, business environment, and social protection and jobs. The risk
has been upgraded to Substantial in line with the PLR of the CPF for Azerbaijan for FY16–FY20.
84. Macroeconomic risk is Moderate. The country’s economic performance is expected to
strengthen over the medium term. This remains to be driven mostly from increased natural gas exports;
however, it will serve only as a temporary boost. In the absence of structural reforms, reducing the state
footprint in the economy, fostering competition, and allowing private sector participation, non-oil sector
growth is expected to remain sluggish. The fiscal balance is projected to remain in surplus (with the
assumption that oil prices will remain firm in the medium term and the Government will adhere to the
fiscal rule adopted in 2018). However, the economy is still exposed to risks posed by the high volatility of
oil prices and growing global economic tensions. Potential negative impacts of the macroeconomic shocks
on the poor, if any, could be mitigated by promoting their access to self-employment opportunities.
49 World Bank. 2014. Reducing the Vulnerability of Azerbaijan’s Agricultural Systems to Climate Change. A World Bank study.
Washington, D.C., World Bank.
Page 32 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_37>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
85. Sector strategies and policies risk is Moderate. Developing self-employment measures is a high
priority in Azerbaijan. Improving the coverage as well as the effectiveness and efficiency of the SEP (which
is also part of the national employment strategy) and improving effectiveness of ALMPs, in general, is
expected to remain at the forefront of employment and social policies in the coming years, and the risk
of being affected by political decisions seems to be moderate. Implementing reforms to improve the
program require effective coordination both vertically (that is, between the SES and MLSPP), as well as
horizontally (that is, among the MLSPP and other relevant line ministries, such as the Ministry of Economy
or the Ministry of Agriculture). The team will mitigate this risk by ongoing policy dialogue and technical
assistance, as well as coordination with key development partners supporting the Government (for
example, EU, UNDP, and ILO).
86. Technical design of project risk is Substantial. The project is supporting activities in which the
Government has demonstrated strong ownership, that are high in the policy agenda, and that respond to
needs the Government is aware of. The technical design of the project, however, is expected to be
complex and will require significant adjustments to the existing interventions to be successful, including
in technical areas where the client’s knowledge is emerging. For example, linking the SEP better with
ALMPs, or developing complementary business support measures, will require a significant amount of
technical assistance provided to the client and developed and coordinated with the involvement of the
PIU.
87. Institutional capacity for implementation- and sustainability-related risks are Substantial. The
MLSPP has limited capacity to administer and track programs and monitor results. The implementation of
the SEP and other ALMPs is under the responsibility of the SES, but the implementation of complementary
support measures requires effective interagency coordination with other line ministries, including
reporting and monitoring. Finally, the ministry has limited capacity to perform activities related to
procurement and financial management. The compliance of the MLSPP data and information system with
acceptable personal data policies has not been assessed at project design. To mitigate this risk, all
components of the project involve capacity building that will be carried out by the PIU. An assessment of
the security of the MLSPP IT security and compliance with data protection policies will be conducted
during implementation to ensure that personal data are protected.
88. Stakeholder-related risks are Moderate. The project will affect a broad group of stakeholders.
Those are vulnerable groups of jobseekers who are youth, women, IDPs, PWDs, and those with lower
levels of education, including the TSSA program beneficiaries and SES service providers. It is expected that
the project will provide more income-generating opportunities for the vulnerable groups, while helping
strengthening capacity for SES staff. If any stakeholder issues arise before or during the project
implementation, they will be managed through a comprehensive stakeholder engagement process.
89. Fiduciary risk is Substantial. The MLSPP has implemented the Social Protection Development
Project (P105116) which closed in 2015. Based on the financial and procurement assessments, the
fiduciary risk is rated Substantial as the volume of transactions carried out in the course of the project is
high. All project procurement will be done centrally by the PIU and the package size and qualification
requirement will be set based on market analysis.
90. Environmental risks are Moderate. The environmental risk of the project is rated Moderate
because potential adverse risks to and impacts on human population and environment are expected to
be negligible. The environmental aspects of the project are mainly those associated with introduction of
Page 33 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_38>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
the best environmental management practices and occupational health and safety standards through
various training programs aimed at development of specific skills to improve employability of jobseekers,
especially for vulnerable groups of population. No environmental due diligence instrument is required to
be prepared. References to the general Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSGs) and, as
appropriate, to the industry-specific EHSGs and Good International Industry Practices, will be duly
incorporated in the design and scope of the training programs and advisory services to be supported by
the project.
91. The social risk is rated Moderate because the project does not have significant negative social
impacts and aims to improve employment opportunities among vulnerable groups of people/jobseekers:
youth, women, IDPs, PWDs, and those with lower levels of education, including beneficiaries of the TSSA
program. The project will achieve this primarily through improving the effectiveness and enhancing the
scale of the existing SEP and by strengthening the capacity of SES to deliver employment services. At this
stage, data on the potential beneficiaries are not known. There is a risk of exclusion and inclusion errors.
Exclusion error fails to target people who actually need to benefit, whereas, inclusion error may cause
inefficient targeting of the project beneficiaries. From the social perspective exclusion error is more
significant. Also, as part of Component 1, it is proposed to improve the targeting of the SEP by a screening
of individuals for their entrepreneurial attitude and knowledge to business development in sectors other
than agriculture. Because not all jobseekers will have the motivation or be able to become a successful
entrepreneur, accessing the TSSA and SES will become critical to project-affected parties. The project
design needs to address the risk of exclusion error and ensure that people who actually need to benefit
are ‘included’ in the project and will be able to participate and derive full benefits from the project.
Toward this, a social assessment will be conducted to inform the targeting or profiling of the TSSA
vulnerable groups and minimize the potential exclusion error, as will outreach and program promotion
activities to ensure that targeted groups are aware of and able to access program benefits.
.
Page 34 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_39>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
VII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING
Results Framework
COUNTRY: Azerbaijan
Employment Support Project
Project Development Objectives(s)
The Project Development Objective is to improve vulnerable people's access to employment.
Project Development Objective Indicators
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO
Indicator Name DLI Baseline End Target
Increased share of SEP businesses in operation 24 months after asset transfer, by vulnerable group
Share of SEP businesses in operation 24 months after asset
0.00 50.00
transfer, by vulnerable group (Percentage)
Increased employment rate among registered unemployed, by vulnerable groups
Employment rate among vulnerable registered jobseeksers, by
35.00 40.00
vulnerable groups (Percentage)
PDO Table SPACE
Intermediate Results Indicators by Components
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO
Indicator Name DLI Baseline End Target
Enhancing the scope and effectiveness of the Self-Employment Program
Number of SEP beneficiaries supported by the project (Number) 0.00 22,000.00
Page 35 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_40>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO
Indicator Name DLI Baseline End Target
Share of female SEP beneficiaries (Percentage) 24.00 40.00
Share of SEP beneficiaries receiving follow up visits (Percentage) 0.00 100.00
Number of SEP beneficiaries receiving mentoring services
0.00 8,800.00
(Number)
Number of successful SEP applicants completing the business
0.00 27,000.00
training (Number)
Number of successful SEP applicants receiving assets (Number) 0.00 22,000.00
TSSA transition strategy is finalized and adopted (Yes/No) No Yes
A mobile application for SEP beneficiaries is developed and
No Yes
operational (Yes/No)
Number of rayons where the project operates (Number) 0.00 52.00
Number of rayons with semi-annual local consultations on
0.00 52.00
planning or implementation of SEP activities (Number)
Share of SEP businesses in operation 12 months after asset
0.00 70.00
transfer, by vulnerable group (Percentage)
Strengthening employment services and programs
Communication and outreach strategy adopted (Yes/No) No Yes
Number of communication and dissemination activities
0.00 10.00
conducted per rayon (Number)
Number of SES staff trained on profiling tools (Number) 0.00 165.00
Number of SES staff trained on case management tools (Number) 0.00 100.00
Number of individual action plans developed for newly
registered jobseekers at risk of long-term unemployment 0.00 3,200.00
(Number)
Labor skills demand assessment is completed (Yes/No) No Yes
Share of SES job counselors receiving gender sensitivity training
0.00 100.00
during the program (Percentage)
Page 36 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_41>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO
Indicator Name DLI Baseline End Target
VTC strategy is adopted and operational/IT investments made in
No Yes
VTCs (Yes/No)
Newly registered unemployed profiled (Number) 0.00 21,000.00
Registered jobseekers placed in jobs thanks to SES
75,000.00 85,000.00
intermediation services (Number)
Number of communication and outreach activities per rayon
0.00 15.00
targeting women (Number)
jobseeker profiling system is operational and used by SES
No Yes
counselors (Yes/No)
Number of newly registered jobseekers with SES (Number) 10,000.00 20,000.00
Project management, monitoring and evaluation
Number of monitoring reports produced and available online
0.00 8.00
(Number)
Beneficiaries satisfaction with the program (Percentage) 0.00 90.00
SES MIS upgraded to include skills profiling tool and grievance
No Yes
redress mechanism (Yes/No)
IO Table SPACE
UL Table SPACE
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators
Methodology for Data Responsibility for Data
Indicator Name Definition/Description Frequency Datasource
Collection Collection
Calculated as: (number of
Share of SEP businesses in operation 24 every 6 MLSPP monitoring
SES businesses still alive 24 PIU MLSPP
months after asset transfer, by vulnerable months system
after asset transfer) /
group
(number of SES businesses
Page 37 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_42>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
that have received assets),
overall and broken down by
vulnerable group (women,
youth, IDP, TSSA
beneficiaries)
Calculated as: (number of
registered jobseekers who MLSPP/SES
are placed in jobs or SEP) /
Employment rate among vulnerable (overall number of every 6 Jobseekers:
MLSPP MLSPP
registered jobseeksers, by vulnerable registered jobseekers with months women 31%,
groups SES), overall and broken youth 38.2%,
down by vulnerable group IDPs 11%
(women, youth, IDP, TSSA
beneficiaries)
ME PDO Table SPACE
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators
Methodology for Data Responsibility for Data
Indicator Name Definition/Description Frequency Datasource
Collection Collection
SEPIS
Calculated as overall every 6 MLSPP admin data on
Number of SEP beneficiaries supported by integrated MLSPP
number of SEP beneficiaries months the program
the project system
financed under the project
Calculated as: (Number of
female SEP every 6
MLSPP MLSPP MLSPP
Share of female SEP beneficiaries beneficiaries)/(Overall months
number of SEP beneficiaries)
Calculated as: (Number of every 6 SEPIS admin data of the
Share of SEP beneficiaries receiving follow MLSPP
SEP beneficiaries receiving months integrated program
up visits
follow up visits) / (Number system
Page 38 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_43>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
of total SEP beneficiaries)
(Number of SEP
Number of SEP beneficiaries receiving 6 months MLSPP MLSPP MLSPP
beneficiaries receiving
mentoring services
mentoring services)
Calculated as: Number of
successful SEP applicants every 6 regular reporting from
Number of successful SEP applicants Ministry Ministry
completing the business months the system
completing the business training
training under the project
Calculated as: number of
successful SEP applicants every 6 Ministry/syst
Number of successful SEP applicants Ministry
receiving assets under the months em
receiving assets
project
confirms whether the
TSSA transition strategy is finalized and transition strategy is
adopted finalized and adopted
(yes/no)
A mobile application for SEP beneficiaries
is developed and operational
Number of rayons the
Number of rayons where the project MLSPP MLSPP MLSPP MLSPP
project operates in
operates
Number of rayons with semi-annual local
MLSPP
consultations on planning or
implementation of SEP activities
Share of SEP businesses in operation 12
months after asset transfer, by vulnerable
group
Communication and outreach strategy The communication and every year MLSPP MLSPP MLSPP
adopted outreach strategy is
Page 39 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_44>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
prepared and adopted to
better inform job seekers
and employers
Calculated as: Number of
rayons where
Number of communication and
communication and 6months MLSPP MLSPP MLSPP
dissemination activities conducted per
outreach activities take
rayon
place at least once a year
Calculated as: Number of
Number of SES staff trained on profiling SES staff trained on profiling
tools tools (number)
Calculated as: Number of
SES staff trained on case every 6
Number of SES staff trained on case MLSPP/SES MLSPP
management tools months
management tools
(number)
Number of individual action plans Number of individual action
developed for newly registered plans developed for newly
jobseekers at risk of long-term registered jobseekers at risk
unemployment of long-term unemployment
Confirms whether the labor every 6
Labor skills demand assessment is MLSPP/SES Ministry data MLSPP
skills demand assessment is months
completed
completed
Calculated as: (Number of
SES councilors having
Share of SES job counselors receiving every 6
received gender sensitivity MLSPP MLSPP MLSPP
gender sensitivity training during the months
training) / (Overall number
program
of SES councilors)
Page 40 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_45>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
it monitors whether
every 6
VTC strategy is adopted and Operational/IT investments MLSPP MLSPP MLSPP
months
operational/IT investments made in VTCs were made in VTCs to
enhance their capacity
calculated as: number of MLSPP MLSPP MLSPP MLSPP
Newly registered unemployed profiled
newly registered jobseekers
every six
Registered jobseekers placed in jobs SES/DOST SES and DOST
months
thanks to SES intermediation services
Number of communication
Number of communication and outreach
and outreach activities per
activities per rayon targeting women
rayon targeting women
jobseeker profiling system
jobseeker profiling system is operational
operational and used by SES
and used by SES counselors
counselors
Number of newly registered jobseekers
with SES
number of monitoring
Number of monitoring reports produced MLSPP MLSPP MLSPP MLSPP
reports produced and
and available online
available online
Calculated as: (Number of
SEP beneficiaries satisfied
Beneficiaries satisfaction with the
with the program)/(Number
program
of SEP beneficiaries)
confirms if the SES MIS is
SES MIS upgraded to include skills
upgraded to include skills
profiling tool and grievance redress
profiling tool and grievance
mechanism
redress mechanism
ME IO Table SPACE
Page 41 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_46>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
Page 42 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_47>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
ANNEX 1: DETAILED PROJECT DESCRIPTION
Employment Support Project (P171250)
Project Description
1. The Employment Support Project aims to improve vulnerable people’s access to
employment, through activities under the following three components:
• Enhancing the scope and effectiveness of the Self-Employment Program (SEP)
• Strengthening employment services and programs
• Project management, monitoring and evaluation
Component 1: Enhancing the scope and effectiveness of the Self-Employment Program (SEP)
(US$95.5 million)
2. As part of the project, 22,000 new beneficiaries are expected to be provided with in-kind
transfers and enhanced self-employment support. In addition, the project will develop a support
structure that enhances the effectiveness of the program.50 This will be established by (a)
strengthening the provision of business skills (including personality traits), business practices, and
technical skills; (b) expanding the scope of the program toward income-generating activities not
related to livestock (such as small manufacturing, food processing, and services); (c) introducing
individualized business support services to increase the likelihood of business survival; and (d)
providing private sector pathways for potential high growth SEP beneficiaries. In line with the currently
implemented government program, the maximum amount of in-kind transfers provided by the project
will be AZN 7,000. The project will start to be implemented in 27 regions of the country—elaborated
in annex 2—and then will be scaled to additional areas by expanding its geographical scope to other
rayons (as approved by the World Bank) after learning from the implementation experience of the first
year. Beneficiaries will be primarily reached through the jobseeker registry. To address the low rate of
economic activity among women in Azerbaijan, outreach activities will be tailored to inactive females,
with a view to increase their registration with the SES as jobseekers. Case management approaches
will also be developed with a view to consider gender-specific labor market barriers (for example,
childcare responsibilities).
3. Enhancing the SEP must address structural constraints in the currently implemented
program. This requires (a) expanding support toward services, manufacturing, and non-livestock
agriculture ventures; (b) providing both technical and entrepreneurial knowledge and skills training to
beneficiaries; (c) addressing the lack of self-confidence and other psychological barriers caused by
long-term unemployment as well as social, economic, physical, or attitudinal vulnerabilities; and (d)
linking the SEP with private sector opportunities and formal access to finance. International evidence51
suggests that simultaneously addressing these challenges requires a comprehensive approach to
selecting and supporting beneficiaries as well as a range of support services. Furthermore, expanded
50 The project outlines the development of a support structure that has been designed to target beneficiaries funded from
World Bank sources with a view to expand it to non-World Bank (government)-funded beneficiaries.
51 Cho, Y. and Honorati, M. 2014. “Entrepreneurship Programs in Developing Countries: A Meta Regression Analysis”, Labor
Economics, Vol. 28©: 110-130; and Banerjee, A. et al. 2016. “The Long term Impacts of a “Graduation” Program: Evidence
from West Bengal”, published online at https://economics.mit.edu/files/12031
Page 43 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_48>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
outreach activities, based on wider and deeper engagement of the SES in the community and the
concurrent collection of client information, are a necessary condition for project success.
4. The service provision process should combine case management with a participatory
approach. Support services will begin at the intake and induction of the SEP beneficiary and
accompany them throughout the program. The project will also employ a participatory approach
involving central and local stakeholders that will be involved in advising the project at the local level.
SEPCOs—that is, staff currently employed in each local SES centers—will carry the case from
application to completion. SEPCOs will serve as the guide of the beneficiary, helping them navigate the
application process; identify specific technical or business knowledge needs and possible social
challenges (low income, childcare responsibilities, and disability); and locate and make available
suitable solutions and responses to each of these issues once the business plan has been approved.
Subcomponent 1.1: Expanding the program scale and scope of support (US$93.3 million)
5. Subcomponent 1.1 will support program scale-up to 22,000 new clients and the
development of additional training modules. This subcomponent will support (a) the scale-up of the
program over the project duration and (b) the development and implementation of specific business
and financial skills training modules based on the ILO’s standard SIYB52 training module. In line with
the currently implemented intervention, Subcomponent 1.1 will provide in-kind assets in the
maximum amount of AZN 7,000. However, the assets offered by the program will be considerably more
diverse. The program will move away from predominantly livestock agriculture toward exclusively
proving in-kind assets in the form of tools, equipment, and machinery for small manufacturing, food
processing, and services activities. In cooperation with the MLSPP, the team has established an initial
list of assets that the program can finance. The choice of assets to be financed will be adapted to local
economic conditions to ensure market relevance and the existence of value chains for the SEP
business: this will be ensured through periodic consultations with local stakeholders through existing
coordination mechanisms established by legislation. Based on the requests of current SEP
beneficiaries, assets are requested to mostly enable income-generating activities for small
manufacturing (for example, carpet weaving and carpentry); food processing (for example,
confectionery and dairy processing); and services (for example, electricians and welders). This initial
list will be periodically revised throughout the course of project implementation based on demand and
approved business plans. The project’s annual targets are summarized in table 1.1.
Table 1.1. Expected Number of Beneficiaries to be Financed from World Bank Sourcea
Year 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Total New Clients
New 2,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 22,000
beneficiaries
Note: In 2018, 7,267 applications were accepted out of 7,896 applicants, but only 6,018 were provided with
assets. a. 10,000 beneficiaries are expected to be funded by the state budget every year
6. The project will develop an enhanced application and selection mechanism to ensure greater
transparency and sustainability. The selection of beneficiaries will start with the verification of the
applicant meeting the legal criteria for participating in the SEP based on the existing jobseeker registry
and the cross-check with other administrative databases. Emphasis will be placed on proposed projects
not related to agriculture and on applicants belonging to vulnerable groups (women, youth, IDPs,
PWDs, former prisoners, and the TSSA recipients). The selection mechanism will be enhanced to give
52 The SIYB training is among the largest global business management training programs with a focus on starting and
improving businesses for people with lower education levels. It is structured into four separate training packages, which are
designed to respond to the progressive stages of business development: (a) generating the business idea, (b) starting the
business, (c) improving the business, and (d) expanding the business.
Page 44 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_49>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
additional weight to these groups in selecting projects. The current application process will be
complemented with mobile technologies. The project will finance a mobile app that will allow for
online application and interaction between applicants/beneficiaries and SES staff. This facilitated
interaction will allow for more timely assistance of beneficiaries if they encounter problems in their
business plan execution. The app will facilitate information sharing and contact between the applicants
and projects. It will also be able to accommodate monitoring or data collection—for example,
submission of beneficiary data—and will be designed in a way that allows for future upgrades, for
example, online payments. Once eligibility is verified, the applicant will undergo the following
preparatory activities:
(a) A one-day orientation workshop elaborated in Subcomponent 1.2.
(b) A 40-hour SIYB training that will lead to the design of a fully developed business plan. The
business plan will be reviewed and approved (or rejected) by an evaluation committee53
comprising local technical experts, trainers, SES central staff, MLSPP staff, and head of
the SES local office. The applicant’s business plan may be either rejected, approved, or
approved with the applicant having the option of taking technical training. At every
juncture of the application process, the applicant may opt out of the SEP to reenter the
SES. A detailed description of the application and induction process is presented in figure
1.1.
7. The project will design and implement additional types of trainings for new SEP clients. To
support the scale-up and expansion of the SEP, the project will finance the development and delivery
of new types of training to clients. First, ‘orientation workshops’ will be delivered to motivate the
participants and manage expectations. These workshops will last one day and will be provided at the
SES local offices. The current ILO’s SIYB training will be strengthened to also include modules on
financial literacy and ‘personal initiative’ training. In addition, SEP beneficiaries will be invited to
improve technical skills relevant to the chosen vocation to support the success of the SEP business:
technical training will be either delivered at the two VTCs managed by the MLSPP or outsourced to
private service providers contracted by the PIU through project funds. To this end, the project will
finance the upgrading of the MLSPP’s VTCs and assist the MLSPP in establishing an adequate selection
mechanism for private training providers.
8. The SIYB entrepreneurship training will be enhanced to incorporate psycho-motivational
elements to help improve entrepreneurial (soft) skills and foster a proactive mindset. Vulnerable
individuals, especially the poor, lack voice, self-esteem, and agency, that is, the capacity to act
independently and make their own free choices. This deficiency is as important a barrier to
entrepreneurship as lack of financial resources, financial literacy, or technical skills. According to
international experience,54 this is especially true for women in traditional societies, PWDs, and the
long-term unemployed. Furthermore, emerging evidence55 demonstrates that personal initiative
training has a significantly higher impact than traditional business training (such as the ILO SIYB
training) on profits and sales. Empowerment, inducing and maintaining SEP participants’
determination, and building and reinforcing their self-esteem have central importance for a successful
business. Against this background, the project-financed upgrading of the SIYB training, provided to all
53 Currently, the evaluation committee comprises two experts from the SES and the head of the SES local office.
54 See for example, Armendáriz, Beatriz, and Jonathan Morduch. 2010. “The Economics of Microfinance.” Second edition.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press; or OECD/EU. 2016. “Inclusive Business Creation: Good Practice Compendium.” OECD
Publishing, Paris. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264251496-en.
55 Campos, F. et al. 2018). “Teaching Personal Initiative Beats Traditional Training in Boosting Small Business in West Africa”,
Science, Vol. 257, Is. 6357; McKenzie, D. & Woodruff, C. 2017. "Business Practices in Small Firms in Developing Countries,”
Management Science, Vol. 63(9).
Page 45 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_50>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
beneficiaries, will incorporate psycho-motivational elements based on relevant international good
practices. The project will also finance the training of trainers to deliver the enhanced
entrepreneurship module. As evidence shows that these types of trainings are especially effective for
women, this subcomponent will enhance the gender sensitivity of the overall project.
9. The SEP beneficiaries will be further provided with relevant technical skills trainings.
Technical skills training courses will be offered to the SEP participants, in line with the activities they
intend to carry out as part of the program, to improve the use of assets as well as the profitability and
sustainability of their businesses. These short-term trainings (with a duration of about one to three
months) will be either provided through the VTCs (depending on available capacity and vocation
needed by the SEP beneficiaries) or outsourced to private providers through a competitive selection
among prequalified private training providers, as the majority of private providers in Azerbaijan are
not accredited providers. The project will assist the MLSPP in ensuring a high-quality bidding process
and selection of providers. Moreover, the MLSPP’s own VTCs will also be used for these trainings,
depending on geographic availability: this will be regulated by a collaboration protocol between the
PIU and VTCs. Around 60 percent of beneficiaries (around 3,000 beneficiaries each year) are expected
to receive technical training. During technical training, participants will get AZN 250 stipend to cover
meal and transportation costs. The project will try to group SEP beneficiaries in classes of 15 each,
based on course demand for cost effectiveness.
10. To ensure high quality of trainings in the MLSPP VTCs, the project will upgrade instruction
and equipment in the VTCs. As part of the project, a basic training of trainers and curriculum upgrade
of courses will be provided in the VTCs. The project will finance the development of new and upgrading
of the existing training modules in the MLSPP’s VTCs in line with international best practices. It will also
finance the training of trainers in the VTCs with a particular focus on building their capacity for adult
education and working with vulnerable individuals, areas where the VTC trainers currently do not
receive training in. The training will initially be delivered through private training providers who will
develop and deliver two modular programs. These two programs will then be transferred to the MLSPP
for delivery by the VTC to new instructors and as a refresher course to be completed every 24 to 36
months. The project will further support equipment purchases by the VTCs. For example, to effectively
support SEP ventures in the digital service sector, the project will finance training equipment such as
3D printers, computers, and at least one server to provide training on basic network support.
Specialized equipment and trainings for improved pooling of agricultural assets—micro-dairy
processing, processing and packaging food, and so on—may also be considered.
11. The project will also provide financial incentives for beneficiaries to open bank accounts.
First, the project will subsidize the fee of opening of a bank account for all project beneficiaries. The
subsidy, jointly with the financial literacy provided at the training, is expected to increase beneficairies’
capacity to save and thus assist them in accumulating capital for business expansion.
Page 46 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_51>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
Figure 1.1. Application and Business Support Activities in Component 1
Subcomponent 1.2: Testing the introduction of complementary business support services for selected
SEP beneficiaries (US$1.7 million)
12. This subcomponent will support complementary services aimed at expanding a select
number of SEP businesses with higher potential to grow. The objective of this subcomponent is to
provide complementary services to promote business expansion of SEP businesses for a subset of SEP
beneficiaries who have higher prospects to grow their business beyond subsistence. It is expected that
Page 47 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_52>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
some of the businesses supported by the SEP56 will maintain their livelihoods based on the sector of
their in-kind transfer, some will exit their lines of business, while others will grow and hire additional
labor.57 This subcomponent is meant to implement, on a small-scale, activities that address
informational, knowledge, and financial constraints that may prevent selected SEP business from
growing. The performance of this subcomponent will inform the design of policies to bridge high
growth potential SEP businesses with interventions targeted to microenterprises.
13. This subcomponent will support the piloting and evaluation of a set of services to increase
the likelihood of SEP business profitability and sustainability over time. To this end, this
subcomponent will invest in services that could turn small promising SEP businesses into growing
businesses. Promising SEP businesses will be identified based on their business performance and plan
to grow about 12 months after receiving the in-kind asset. Specifically, the subcomponent will finance
the following services for a few selected SEP businesses:
(a) Provision of additional funding as a matching grant of maximum amount AZN 3,500 for
those SEP beneficiaries who intend to expand their line of business based on adjudication
of their expansion business plans;
(b) Larger business award to be awarded based on a business plan competition where
proposals to scale up the business will be prepared, by SEP beneficiaries, and evaluated;
(c) Provision of individual mentoring visits and advisory services during the first four months
of business operation focusing on relevant business skills and practices, including market
development and intelligence, as well as management capacity; and
(d) Provision of informational sessions on the existing financial instruments that the SEP
beneficiaries can use to attract additional financing to scale up their business.
14. Providing matching grants and business awards to high growth potential SEP beneficiaries
can help bridge the gap between SEP beneficiaries and access to formal finance. Providing private
sector pathways for poor and vulnerable entrepreneurs who lack collateral (hence are excluded from
most formal financial lending options) but have the skills and entrepreneurial mindset to grow helps
build-in graduation milestones. These milestones are both for public sector agencies wanting to
understand and calibrate the sustainability of the SEP and also for beneficiaries who are provided with
additional capital opportunities.
15. Matching grant schemes have been extensively implemented by development agencies
around the world, including the World Bank, as a private sector development policy instrument. A
matching grant is a short-term partial subsidy for investment and business development which is
provided to SEP beneficiaries on a cost-sharing basis. As a subsidy, matching grants are used to support
the financing of public goods or private goods that have positive spillovers on the economy. Usually,
working capital is not an eligible expense for a matching grant. The funding of equipment and other
assets by matching grants has been debated, with a smaller number of projects allowing the financing
of specific and limited assets. Projects used matching grants as a cost-efficient mechanism to respond
to specific market failures (such as lack of collateral, informational asymmetries, and weaker enterprise
capabilities) in their contexts and achieve more specific objectives (for example, agribusiness
56 Successful SEP beneficiaries are mandated to register their income-generating activity as a business within two years from
receiving the in-kind asset.
57 Currently a major constraint for micro and small and medium enterprises in Azerbaijan.
Page 48 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_53>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
projects).58 Matching grants and business awards must be appropriately tailored to local contexts and
capacities. Matching grants and business awards should only be used when they are determined to be
the most adapted and least-cost tool to reach the project objective in the specific local context. While
there is no blueprint for designing a new matching grant scheme, some considerations from experience
around the world inform how this can be introduced in the SEP in Azerbaijan and include the following:
(a) Active provision of technical assistance to firms during the entire process often increase
the probability of success;
(b) Broad stakeholder engagement and transparency by the implementing agency minimize
risks;
(c) Selection of service providers by the beneficiaries is more advantageous;
(d) Awarding of matching grants based on objective and transparent criteria;
(e) Level of subsidy should be sufficiently attractive for firms but should not be so high that
it reduces their ownership; and
(f) Application and disbursement procedures should be simple.59
16. This subcomponent will pilot the provision of additional capital in the form of either a
matching grant or a business award for SEP beneficiaries who have high prospects to grow their line
of business. A second-round application window60 will be opened for SEP beneficiaries who need
additional capital for investment to expand their business about 12 months after receipt of the in-kind
asset. This is to ensure that SEP beneficiaries have some time to use their in-kind asset, understand
the performance of their business, and decide if they wish to apply for additional support. The
application for both the matching grant and the business award will be a unified application. This
application will mimic the requirements of a microfinance institution (MFI) loan application in
Azerbaijan and will require more detailed information, especially on historic and projected cash flows,
budgeting, accounting, and marketing of the SEP business. It will be a more vigorous application and
screening process than the initial business plan evaluation. To be eligible to apply for this second
round, SEP beneficiaries should prove that the in-kind asset they received through the SEP is still in use
(that is, not sold or damaged) and that the line of business is functionally the same (more details will
be provided in the POM). It is expected that high growth potential SEP beneficiaries will self-select by
completing the form and applying.61 Through a unified application process, SEP beneficiaries will be
eligible for either a matching grant with a maximum amount of AZN 3,500 (on a 50:50 basis for the
purchase of a new asset or service) or a larger business award of AZN 20,000 to support investment.
Matching grants will be provided on a 50:50 basis to 280 beneficiaries during the project lifecycle,
while the larger business award will be provided as a one-time cash transfer to two beneficiaries every
year. An evaluation committee comprising stakeholders from development fund agencies, commercial
58 World Bank. 2016. How to Make Grants a Better Match for Private Sector Development: Review of World Bank Matching
Grant Projects. Washington, DC: World Bank.
59 Ibid.
60 SEP beneficiaries can apply only once to the SEP, based on current legislation.
61 The application form will be more cumbersome and will help strengthen the pool. The importance of keeping financials
from the beginning will be communicated as part of the business training, so that the more willing, opportunity-seeking
entrepreneurs will see the benefit of maintaining financials from receipt of the in-kind asset.
Page 49 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_54>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
banks with concessional loans,62 and representatives of the SES will evaluate this second round of
applications and adjudicate both the business awards and the matching grants. Table 1.2 summarizes
the scope of these matching grants and business awards on a yearly basis.
Table 1.2. Cost Table for Subcomponent 1.2
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Total
SEP beneficiaries
World Bank funded 2,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 22,000
Government funded 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 50,000
Matching grant 0 70 70 70 70 280
beneficiaries
Matching grant maximum 3,500 3,500 3,500 3,500 3,500
amount (AZN)
Matching grant total (AZN) 0 245,000 245,000 245,000 245,000 980,000
Business award 0 2 2 2 2 8
beneficiaries
Business award per winner 20,000 20,000 20,000 20,000 20,000
(AZN)
Business award total (AZN) 0 40,000 40,000 40,000 40,000 160,000
Matching grant and 0 168,150 168,150 168,150 168,150 672,600
business award total (US$)
Access to finance 35,000 35,000 35,000 35,000 35,000 175,000
workshops (US$)
Mentoring visitsa 89,000 190,000 190,000 190,000 190,000 849,000
Subcomponent 1.2 (US$) 124,000 393,150 393,150 393,150 393,150 1,696,600
Notes: US$ 1 = AZN 0.59. There are no matching grant or business award beneficiaries in 2020 as there is a one
year waiting period for applications to open.
a The estimated number of mentoring visit beneficiaries is 8,800.
17. The project will provide financing for local technical and business experts (‘mentors’) to carry
out regular mentoring visits to support beneficiaries. At the initial phase of the project, the PIU will
generate and hire a roster of local experts—mentors—on various technical (for example, activity
related) and business support (accounting and taxes) issues. Their salaries and travel costs will be
financed through the project with the aim of the SES taking over the financing of mentors after the
project ends. Mentors will establish a close relationship with the SEP beneficiaries once the in-kind
support is delivered and the training is completed. It is expected that mentors will conduct six
mentoring visits of about four hours in the course of the first year of implementation. Mentoring visits
will serve to provide not only business (and moral) support, but also identify any skills gaps and
technical challenges with project implementation, foster proactive mindsets, and help build
managerial capital.
18. The project will finance informational sessions on existing debt and equity options for formal
access to finance for SEP beneficiaries. These sessions will raise awareness among SEP beneficiaries
about the different modalities of soft loans and business development services that they can have
access to for expanding their businesses. In particular, the sessions will provide information on the
subsidized agricultural credit program run by the Ministry of Agriculture, the business development
62 As of end 2019 Q3, the MFI sector in Azerbaijan comprised 92 regulated MFIs, including 47 credit unions and 45 nonbank
credit organizations. The total assets of the MFIs as of end September 2019 stood at AZN 314.4 million of which AZN 255
million. The share of MFIs assets in the total financial sector assets was 1 percent as of 2019 Q1; however, the sector plays
an important role in financial inclusion and smaller-size loans.
Page 50 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_55>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
services offered by the Small Business Development Agency, and the support services offered by the
Entrepreneurship Development Fund. Table 1.2 shows the annual budget for these workshops. The
main development funds agencies with concessional lending portfolios are the following:
(a) Azerbaijan Mortgage and Credit Guarantee Fund (established in December 2018 as a
merger of the Credit Guarantee Fund and Azerbaijan Mortgage Fund). The fund owns a
partial credit guarantee schemes (PSG) scheme and provides guarantees and subsidized
interest rates on banks’ lending to entrepreneurs, including small and medium
enterprises.
(b) Azerbaijan Entrepreneurship Development Fund (formerly ANFES, established in 2002,
renamed in 2018). The fund provides concessional lending to entrepreneurs, targeting
different sectors of real economy, mainly agriculture. It serves large firms as well as small
and medium enterprises and lends to public financial institutions (mainly banks) at 1
percent and banks onlend at 5 percent to 7 percent interest rate.
(c) State Agency for Agricultural Credits (reformatted in 2018). The agency sits under the
Ministry of Agriculture and channels funds to farmers through public financial
institutions. The onlending interest rate is between 5 percent and 6 percent.
(d) Innovation Agency (reformatted in 2018). The agency works with innovative start-ups.
(e) Small and Medium Enterprise Development Agency (established in 2017 under the
Ministry of Economy) does not provide loans to the small and medium enterprises at this
point. They plan to establish a Small and Medium Enterprise Development Fund to crowd
in private investment into the small and medium enterprises sector. The model is still
being discussed. The goal of this activity is to provide successful beneficiaries with the
next stepping stone to be able to expand their businesses.
Subcomponent 1.3: Improving the governance and coordination mechanism of SEP (US$0.5 million)
19. The project will train SES staff for improved engagement modalities with SEP clients and
improved program implementation. The project will provide training for existing SES staff working
with SEP beneficiaries—further referred to as SEPCOs—to possess a basic understanding in all aspects
of the SEP operations, from working with vulnerable groups to recognizing needs to understanding
basic management accounting. In addition to their (existing) administrative functions, SEPCOs will be
expected to carry out an expanded set of tasks, including technical and social support to clients. To this
end, SEPCOs will be trained on (a) communication and client engagement, (b) M&E, (c) principles and
practices of social work63 (including identification of social and health constraints and referrals), (d)
basic business feasibility, (e) basic management accounting, and (f) taxation.
20. The project will also strengthen the outreach and application process for the SEP within local
SES centers. SEPCOs will promote the program among registered jobseekers online, as well as through
live outreach activities such as local information days, and support clients throughout the application
and implementation process, including by identifying and deploying dedicated technical and business
experts from a roster of available consultants. Outreach activities will pay specific attention to women
to increase their participation in the SEP.
63 The social worker profession is very young in Azerbaijan, having been recognized by the Law on Social Services in 2012. The
MLSPP jointly with the World Bank developed the national standards and criteria for social workers in 2013–2014. Currently,
social workers are trained in seven universities.
Page 51 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_56>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
21. The project will finance interventions to improve the coordination between the TSSA and
SEP. Currently, the TSSA recipients become ineligible for the TSSA after receiving assets from the SEP.
The MLSPP is planning to establish a three-month continuation from the moment the assets are
received to provide a ‘welfare bridge’ for SEP participants. To ensure a smooth transition between
these programs, the project will develop a strategy as well as operational modalities for the TSSA
graduation, and for the entry/reentry of unsuccessful SEP beneficiaries (that is, whose business have
failed and could not secure employment either through the SES) into the TSSA program.
22. The project will also support trainings for frontline staff in social welfare offices who conduct
the registration of the TSSA beneficiaries. To ensure that TSSA recipients are aware of opportunities
provided by the SEP and direct the TSSA recipients toward the shared services provided, the project
will provide financing for training of front office staff who work at the point of beneficiary contact. The
training will also provide information on the SEP information system as well as on the module
connecting it with the TSSA.
23. The project will upgrade the SES MIS related to managing the SEP, to aid the selection of an
application by SEPCO. The current SES MIS collects basic demographic variables and provides
information on participants’ vulnerability categories—with advanced data management and analytical
capabilities. The MIS will be upgraded to allow for the development of a business intelligence
dashboard to help synthesize information on the SEP both for decision support and
transparency/accountability purposes, including a geospatial (project mapping) application. An
evaluation system will be introduced to allow for a rigorous and transparent evaluation and tracking
of beneficiary applications and data. The system will take into account data collected at the application
and eligibility assessment stage—such as demographic information or location of the proposed
business—and will be complemented by a ranking algorithm to prioritize vulnerable clients. The
evaluation system will provide a well-documented pathway for transparency and accountability
around SEPCO decisions. The system’s links with the M&E arrangements will be further elaborated in
Component 3.
24. Streamlined online support services will be provided by the SES through a dedicated
beneficiary support portal and mobile app. The project will finance the development of a dedicated
web portal launched in the first year and operated from the second year onward. The site will be easily
accessible through a mobile application to allow clients of the SEP a versatile and convenient way to
reach information and interact with the SES. The application can offer a range of information of various
topics including (a) types of ventures with market information (statistics and links); (b) frequently asked
questions and solutions repository; (c) interaction with SEPCO (such as booking appointments or other
streamlined requests), communities of practice, and/or other SEP participants (for example, based on
sector or geolocation); (d) case studies and success stories; (e) beneficiary tools such as bookkeeping
or monitoring; (f) useful resources and links; and (g) initial registration along with a self-assessment
and aptitude test to prepare the applicant before engaging with a SEPCO. The app will facilitate
interaction between beneficiaries and the SES, allow for more timely service provision, and allow
beneficiaries to request assistance from the SES if they encounter problems in establishing their
businesses. Both the portal and the app will be linked to the Self-Employment Project Information
System (SEPIS). The app may also accommodate mobile payment or fintech features that could
introduce further flexibility into the program.
25. An assessment of the country personal data protection policies and the MLSPP’s data
systems will be conducted during implementation to identify gaps. The objective will be to put in
place a framework for protecting personal data used in the program, strengthening the IT governance
Page 52 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_57>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
and capacity, and ensuring that project personal data-related activities are carried out in accordance
with international best practices.64
Component 2: Strengthening employment services and programs (US$2 million)
26. Component 2 aims to support the SES’ capacity to perform its core tasks in the employment
service delivery chain including clients’ assessment, counseling and job matching, and referral to
appropriate employment programs. This component complements the first component in achieving
the overall objective of the project as it will allow the SES to adequately segment SES clients between
the SEP and other employment programs (as of now only short-term adult technical training and
workers’ retraining are offered). In particular, some of the SES’ clients might not have the skills or
motivation required for entrepreneurship and would therefore be better served through other forms
of assistance.
27. Component 2 further aims at increasing the number and diversity of SES beneficiaries.
Vulnerable groups need to access SES services to increase their employability. Past analytical work
conducted in Europe65 suggests that vulnerable groups in the labor market tend to face multiple
overlapping barriers, some directly related to education and skills, and some—such as health status or
care responsibilities— outside of the purview of employment services. Against this background, the
activities under Component 2 will strengthen the SES’ outreach services toward vulnerable populations
and tailor the SES’ employment services with a view to address the diverse needs of vulnerable clients.
28. Component 2 also aims to support the VTCs expansion and improvement efforts of the
MLSPP. The two vocational schools operated by the MLSPP are fully functional but require upgrading
in certain areas if they are to provide labor market-relevant training to SEP participants. The two
vocational schools operated by the MLSPP are based in Goychay and Baku. The schools provide short-
term vocational trainings of two, two and a half, or three months duration for unemployed individuals
registered with the SES. Students from other areas of the country receive a travel and living stipend
for the duration of their training. The choice of training module is based largely on the supply of
programs available at the school and not necessarily on the aptitude of the trainee. Furthermore,
schools have limited autonomy as their budget and curricula are determined centrally. They also have
only limited resources for outreach activities with employers and M&E of the success of their training
programs. The activities under Component 2 will support the MLSPP in its efforts to upgrade the VTCs.
Subcomponent 2.1: Labor market assessment and development of a VTC strategy (US$0.7 million)
29. This subcomponent will support the SES to assess the short- and medium-term skills
demand. This activity will finance a comprehensive labor market assessment to improve the SES’
capacity to detect vacancies, critical occupations, and skills most demanded by employers. It will also
build the SES’ staff capacity (training of SES staff, producing user manuals, and so on) to enable them
to replicate the analysis on their own regularly in the future. First, the project will finance a quantitative
64 International Best Practice consists of the following: (i) (a) ensure the rights of individuals with respect to the fair and
legitimate processing of their data, including that the purpose of collection and use of data are known to those individuals,
(b) only that data which is necessary for the stated purposed are collected and used, (c) data be retained only for so long as
is necessary for such purpose, and (d) individuals whose data is collected and used have the right to ensure the confidentiality
and accuracy of that data, and (ii) data processors (a) take such measures as are necessary to ensure the security of such data
and that such data are processed transparently, (b) undertake not to transfer such data to third parties without the consent
of those individuals, and (c) provide procedures and mechanisms to enable the rights described above.
65 Isik-Dikmelik, A., Mirey, O., Frieda, V., Natalia, M., and Sandor, K. 2018. Portraits of Labor Market Exclusion 2.0: Synthesis
Note (English). Washington, DC: World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/429631522094515647/Synthesis-
Note.
Page 53 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_58>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
analysis to be conducted by using survey and administrative data sources, including the SES’ own
databases, the labor force survey data collected by the national statistical committee, data from the
firm registry database, online vacancy bank data,66 or online ‘live’ job postings available on public
websites. Second, the project will design and implement a qualitative labor market needs assessment
with both public and private employers and key stakeholders, such as local chambers. The analysis will
ultimately provide a list of critical occupations and skills most demanded in the market. The occupation
list will then serve as the basis for developing a skills demand repository, by employing a skill
classification methodology. This repository will then be linked with the vacancies for improved job
matching.
30. The activity will further finance the development of a strategy for expansion and
improvement of the VTCs. The MLSPP plans to expand its VTCs in the next couple of years. Along with
the expansion in the number of VTCs, they are also expected to have a capability to respond to the
needs of the labor market through a constant adaptation of the training content and the teaching and
learning processes.67 The strategy will draw on the skills demand assessment and is expected to include
the following aspects for the development of efficient and effective VTCs: (a) physical infrastructure
standards; (b) training module development/improvement guidelines to ensure the relevance of
curricula and qualifications to labor market needs; (c) lifelong learning path for changing roles,
competences, and professional development of the VTC teachers and trainers; (d) ways of ensuring
active involvement and participation of employers in training development and delivery; (e)
organizational structure, management practices, and governance; (f) process chain for training delivery
starting from trainee selection to certification; (g) national/international qualification standards; and
(h) widening access and visibility particularly involving vulnerable groups in training.
Subcomponent 2.2: Outreach, profiling, skills assessment, and case management for jobseekers
(US$1.3 million)
31. The activity will finance the development and rollout of a communication and outreach
strategy. The strategy will aim at (a) strengthening the channels for reaching non-registered jobseekers
(with a particular focus on vulnerable populations), (b) building awareness about the functioning and
benefits of the SES services, (c) collecting job offers (vacancies) from private employers, and (d)
facilitating firms’ participation in available SES employment services and programs. The activity will
also support the strategy’s rollout. This may include communication campaigns, training, as well as
advisory services to private employers. To address the low rate of economic activity among women in
Azerbaijan, outreach activities will be tailored to inactive females, with a view to increase their
registration with the SES as jobseekers. Case management approaches will also be developed with a
view to consider gender-specific labor market barriers (for example, childcare responsibilities).
32. The project will further finance the development of a statistical profiling tool and the
development of skill assessment tests for jobseekers. The profiling tool will be based on
socioeconomic and demographic characteristics of jobseekers’ data collected by the SES. Using an
algorithm, it will assign jobseekers to different risk categories based on their statistical likelihood of
long-term unemployment. The project will also finance the introduction of skill assessment tests,
which will support improved job matching of registered jobseekers by connecting with the vacancy
66 The SES has made a strong effort in developing self-services by introducing an online vacancy bank. In total, 120 desktops
are made available for consulting vacancies as self-service in regional employment centers, vocational education centers,
universities, and several public facilities. The provision of online vacancy information will be extended and further developed
as part of an electronic labor contract registration system.
67 Consultation with businesses reveal that graduates of these training centers do not meet the requirements of employers.
In line with perceptions of the general education systems, there is limited cooperation between the training centers and
private companies, and they perceive the curricula of these training centers as ‘outdated’ (World Bank 2019).
Page 54 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_59>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
database enhanced through the skills demand repository, developed in Subcomponent 2.1. The skills
tests are expected to be short—approximately 30 minutes each—and will be administered through
online platforms. Tests are either self-paced or administered with support from a counselor at the SES
local offices. The skills assessment tests are expected to be piloted in some localities before they are
finalized.
33. Training material on the use of the tools and delivery of training to the SES counselors will
be provided. The project will finance the (a) the development of online instruments to integrate the
profiling tool and skills assessment to the SES MIS, (b) production of user manuals and training
materials, and (c) training of SES staff in using these instruments. These activities will include the
procurement and implementation of data analytics software, as well as capacity building in the MLSPP
and SES. The skills assessment and profiling tools will be built on existing systems in coordination with
ongoing projects and data management efforts in the MLSPP and SES.68 Also, the project will finance
user manuals and training materials about these tools. In conjunction with their introduction, SES staff
will receive training on these instruments to be able to adequately identify what kind of support
jobseekers with different characteristics (such as age, education, length of job search, TSSA
participation) will require and what type of ALMP will likely work well for different kinds of jobseekers.
34. The project will also support the development of a case management approach in the SES.
The SES is expected to tailor its package of employment support services to beneficiaries, particularly
those who are difficult to serve. To this end, the component will include the development of a case
management approach to include needs and skills assessment for at-risk jobseekers, referrals to
counseling and job search assistance, skills training, and/or placement in on-the-job trainings or job
placements that are customized to the maximum extent to the needs of the individuals.69 The case
management will include referrals to outside service providers (for example, social, health, care
services) as needed. This approach will allow segmentation of the SES client/jobseeker base and will
provide support to different groups through different agencies/intermediaries and ease the workload
of the SES as well as provide more intensive and differentiated support, where necessary, to different
groups of jobseekers. Given the specific labor market barriers women face, such as difficulties
accessing training or employment opportunities due to care responsibilities or transportation
constraints, the project will finance gender sensitivity trainings to be organized for a subset of SES job
counselors.
Component 3: Project management, monitoring, and evaluation (US$2.5 million)
35. The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of the MLSPP to implement
the proposed project and use M&E data on labor market interventions that the ministry implements,
including through the SES. This component will inform evidence-based policy making by providing the
Government with a strengthened M&E system. This system will be a critical input to labor policy
decisions in the future.
68 The New Law on Employment (signed on June 29, 2018) promotes the digitalization of employment services. For example,
the law establishes a single information center (including using electronic information resources of state bodies and other
agencies) for registration of employees as well as the procedure for electronic registration of unemployed and jobseekers. In
addition to this, the project will also take into account the skills profiling tool design offered under the ‘Support to the Ministry
on Labor and Social Protection of the Population in Modernizing Public Employment Services in the Republic of Azerbaijan
Project’. In that model, to evaluate employment possibilities, first, jobseekers are asked to fill a questionnaire. After the
questionnaire is filled, the IT system sums up the pointed-out criteria and assigns the jobseeker to one of the three target
groups of employment possibilities. The IT system takes into consideration crucial criteria as well as the age and duration of
unemployment. Evaluation of employment opportunities is carried out repeatedly every three months after six months of
active job search.
Page 55 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_60>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
Subcomponent 3.1: Project management (US$1.3 million)
36. The subcomponent will finance a PIU in the MLSPP to manage the overall project. The PIU
will be responsible for the procurement, financial management, social and environmental
requirements, and monitoring and regularly reporting on the implementation of the three
components, in compliance with World Bank fiduciary and reporting requirements. While the MLSPP
has already implemented a World Bank project (P105116) and is relatively familiar with World Bank
procedures, a strong team for procurement and contracts management will be needed given the
expected high volume of large contracts (notably for the in-kind assets as part of the SEP) to be
procured under Component 1.
37. To this end, the subcomponent will finance consultants’ fees for the PIU staff, equipment
(including IT related) and software as necessary for project management and operational costs. The
establishment of a PIU satisfactory to the World Bank will also be a project effectiveness condition. To
initiate project implementation, the PIU is expected to comprise, at the minimum, a PIU coordinator,
a labor specialist fully dedicated to the SEP (Component 1), a financial management specialist, an
accountant, and a procurement specialist. Once the project is effective, an M&E specialist and two
part-time safeguard specialists will also join the PIU to ensure regular monitoring of the project’s
Results Framework and adherence with social and environmental requirements. The PIU will be
directly supervised by the MLSPP and/or will report to any staff within the MLSPP appointed by the
minister. The subcomponent will also finance the required annual financial audits for the entire project
as well as annual technical audits for Components 1 and 2.
Subcomponent 3.2: Monitoring and evaluation (US$ 1.2 million)
38. This subcomponent will support the MLSPP to strengthen its M&E system to better track
implementation and monitor key labor market interventions, ensure that the programs’ operations
are following expected design and procedures, receive systematic and organized feedback from
beneficiaries and employers, assess key labor market interventions to foster a positive feedback loop
into policy making, and update program design as needed. Specifically, the M&E capacity will be
strengthened at three levels: the SEP level, the SES, and ministry level, respectively. The proposed
activities under this subcomponent and Subcomponent 2.2 will be carried out in accordance with
international best practices.
39. Based on the M&E assessment conducted, some basic indicators on inputs, outputs, and
outcomes of the SES activities are difficult to access. Detailed performance and output indicators of
the SES are not available to the team.70 Annual reports are produced by the ministry to summarize
main indicators on the SEP, though they are not publicly available. There is neither an electronic system
to record and manage grievances nor clear procedural guidelines on how to address complaints.
40. Current reporting by the MLSPP on the SEP suggests only limited M&E activities. For its
reporting and M&E requirements, the MLSPP operates an MIS with different subsystems by sector.
The SES subsystem within the MLSPP MIS system contains and manages all data related to the
employment registry, SEP, and vocational training. Using this data, the MLSPP generates quarterly,
semiannual, and annual reports. However, the analysis in the reports is limited to description of the
number of SEP participants. There is no evidence of socioeconomic analysis or of forecasting of
participant numbers. The MLSPP’s analysis provides only limited strategic insights that could be drawn
70 The World Bank team would require M&E data on the number and characteristics of those receiving unemployment
assistance benefits, the job placement rates among registered jobseekers, job offers’ acceptance and refusals, the number
of referrals made by job counselors, number of unemployed profiles created by the SES counselor, number of vacancies by
occupation and employers’ characteristics, and the characteristics of SEP applicants.
Page 56 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_61>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
from the information collected about users of the SEP subsystem or data from the SEP monitoring
visits.
41. In addition, there is room to improve data warehouse and analytics capacity. Despite the
sophisticated IT data system the ministry invested in, information flow at the policy level is very limited.
The assessment of the SES’ M&E capacity, conducted during project preparations, indicates that the
SES only collects descriptive indicators and does not have a quantifiable Results Framework in place.
At the central level, the MLSPP department in charge of administrative record keeping on all labor
market programs and policies lacks the instruments to collect, and synthetize in a systematic way, data
coming from local branches. There is limited capacity to analyze survey microdata to track the
performance of both social protection and labor programs over time, and assess their distributional
impacts, including impacts on poverty and inequality. Critically a GRM system is absent for key
programs such as the SEP, unemployment assistance, and sponsored vocational training.
42. While the emerging MIS architecture is adequate to handle the operations of the MLSPP,
better integration between subsystems, automated integration of relevant data from other
government sources, and upgraded data infrastructure are needed to perform more complex
performance analysis. The MLSPP’s new MIS (envisaged to be fully operational by January 2020) allows
for a better client interface and more robust data storage and retrieval. However, there are numerous
weaknesses in the new system: (a) the subsystems are connected to the central MLSPP database but
not to each other; (b) there is an absence of data analysis tools; (c) data analysis is limited to description
of past events; and (d) the database is what can be considered as a structured ‘data lake’71 thus limiting
the ability to develop a business intelligence dashboard72 or more complex analysis (diagnostic,
predictive, and prescriptive). To perform more complex performance analysis the MIS architecture
should be altered, and better data integration is required.
43. To address current institutional and operational constraints in M&E, this subcomponent will
finance activities to strengthen the M&E at different levels and promote independent evaluation.
At the Program Level (SEP)
44. Upgrade the functionalities of the SEP module in the existing MIS73 to collect data on
applicants; eligibility verification and determination to the SEP; attendance and completion of different
training (SIYB, technical, and psycho-motivational); business plan assessment outcomes; asset receipt
amount and modality; number of completed mentoring visits; application to and eligibility
determination for the pooling cash incentive and receipt of it; and profitability and sustainability of
business established through the SEP over time.
45. The development of a data analytics/IT software to generate key statistics on the SEP and
ensure interoperability with data from the new SES MIS (currently the ministry uses Excel-based
reports, manually downloaded from the SEP database).
46. Two process evaluations of the SEP operations and procedures at different stages of the SEP
implementation chain (from application, selection of beneficiaries, training, asset disbursement,
follow-up visits, incentives, and constraints to develop cooperatives) to ensure that the SES delivers
71 A data lake is a centralized repository that allows an entity to store all structured and unstructured data.
72 A business intelligence dashboard is a visual information management tool that is used to track predefined key performance
indicators (KPIs), metrics, other key data points, and especially insights.
73 A brand-new MIS was developed to manage and monitor SES activities and is expected to be fully operational by December
2019, with portals in all SES branches. The centralized MIS is also expected to be integrated with other governmental
databases.
Page 57 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_62>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
the expected services to the target population on time and identify key bottlenecks. The first process
evaluation will be carried out in Year 2, once all activities are operational, and the second in Year 3 or
4.
47. A rigorous impact evaluation of the SEP to assess the impacts and cost-effectiveness of the
SEP with the complementary support introduced through the proposed project. The impact
evaluation is planned to be carried out on the cohort of applicants in Year 3 of the project once the
program variations introduced through the project (additional training, follow-up visits, mentoring,
and matching grants) are fully operational. Eligible applicants to the SEP will be randomly assigned to
three groups: (a) a first group of eligible applicants who will participate in the SEP activities with the
variations introduced through the proposed World Bank project, (b) a second group that will
participate in the SEP as it is currently implemented by the SES, and (c) a third group that will form a
control group. A baseline survey will be collected before the implementation of the interventions and
a follow-up survey will be implemented 12 months after receipt of the in-kind assets (before the
project closing date). Outcomes (personal income, business sales and profits, employment status, and
number of hours worked) and costs across the three groups will be compared to assess causal effects
of the program and its cost-effectiveness.
At the SES Level
48. The development of data analytics/IT software to generate key statistics on the SES activities
and outcomes based on the data of the new SES MIS. These IT tools should allow for regular monitoring
of key indicators to track the performance of the different employment services/programs
implemented by the SES beyond the SEP employment services and counseling, training,
unemployment benefits, including input indicators (budget executed, administrative and equipment
expenses, and number of staff employed by task); output indicators (that is, number of employers
contacted, number of vacancies by sector and firm ownership, number of referrals to ALMPs , number
of jobseekers who were offered, accepted, or refused a job offer, number of unemployed profiles
created); and outcomes (job placement rates through job intermediation services and ALMPs).
49. Two annual tracer studies of the employment trajectories of the SES-registered jobseekers
who were placed will be undertaken, and reports based on the data will be compiled.
50. Regular training of the SES staff will be carried out to improve data collection and
organization, in the use of such IT tools to analyze and aggregate data, and undertake the annual tracer
studies and employer satisfaction studies. Although this may appear to be strictly within the
competency of the SES, the VTCs must play a role in the design and analysis of these studies as they
should track the employment trajectories of their graduates. The training will include specialized
training on large database, cybersecurity, personal data protection, and IT management.
At the MLSPP Level
51. Support the development of a sectoral social protection Results Framework and KPIs to
strengthen the ministry’s accountability and performance management, including specifying agreed
indicators, baseline and targets, data sources, frequency of reporting, and roles and responsibilities.
52. Improving the capacity of relevant departments at the MLSPP to produce knowledge and
analysis for evidence-based decision making. This will include training of the department staff to (a)
centralize, collate, and analyze the information from the SES MIS using the statistical software to
generate KPIs, including those in the sectoral Results Framework; (b) analyze survey microdata to
assess the performance of all social protection programs (TSSA, SEP, and training); (c) produce and
Page 58 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_63>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
disseminate quarterly reports on the spending, implementation status, and outcomes of key LM
interventions to inform policy making in the MLSPP and SES; and (d) improve competencies on large
database, cybersecurity, personal data protection, and IT management.
53. Develop the concept, operational guidelines, and the MIS module of a GRM system for the
SES to record and address complaints both from SEP beneficiaries/applicants and from all registered
jobseekers.
54. Two beneficiary assessment surveys: one to be conducted in Year 2 and the second in Year 6.
The sample should include beneficiaries of the SEP, rejected applicants, and the general registered
jobseekers, with and without the ‘unemployment status’. The beneficiary assessment will collect
feedback from the SES beneficiaries on the quality and relevance of the services and programs. Specific
focus will be on the SEP to better understand the relevance of the trainings (SIYB, technical, and
psycho-motivational) provided; the effectiveness of mentoring visits; the adequacy of the frequencies
of mentoring visits; and the quality of trainers/instructors/mentors, among others.
Page 59 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_64>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
ANNEX 2: IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS AND SUPPORT PLAN
COUNTRY: Azerbaijan
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project
Implementation Arrangements
1. The project will be implemented under the leadership of the MLSPP of the Republic of
Azerbaijan. The MLSPP is responsible for developing employment policies and monitoring their
implementation and will lead the implementation of the project through a dedicated PIU to be established
within the ministry, with the close involvement of the Employment Policy Department to manage the
fiduciary functions, and the SES (which is organizationally part of the MLSPP). The project will provide non-
livestock assets, initially limited to 27 rayons, and then scaled up to other rayons (as approved by the
World Bank). Figure 2.1 outlines the project’s implementation arrangements.
Figure 2.1. Implementation Arrangements
2. The project will target specific geographic areas in the country in the first year of
implementation and will then expand to the entire country from the second year onward. The
Government ranked rayons (and subrayons in Baku) based on their combined percentage of (a) the
Page 60 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_65>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
country’s population, (b) the share of all unemployed and jobseekers residing in that area, and (c) the
share of all individuals who have expressed interest in participating in the SEP. Among the highest ranking
districts that represent both rural and urban areas of the country, several rayons (and subrayons in Baku)
have been selected for participation in the project: the Binagadi, Khazar, Yasamal, Nasimi, Surakhani, and
Khatai sub-rayons in Baku; the Sumgait rayon in Absheron; Ganja-Nimazi, Shamkir, and Tovuz rayons in
Ganja-Gazakh; the Gabala and Shaki rayons in Shaki-Zaqatala; the Masali and Lankaran rayons in Lankaran;
the Khachmaz and Guba rayons in Guba-Khachmaz; the Shirvan Mingachevir, Yevlakh, Barda, Goychay,
Imishli, and Salyan rayons in Aran; the Agyhdam and Fuzuli rayons in Yukhari-Garabagh; and Ismayili and
Shamaki rayons in Daghlig Sirvan. These rayons represent a broad spectrum of the different economic and
geographic conditions in Azerbaijan. Project activities will only be carried out in areas controlled by the
Government. Based on first-year implementation results, starting from 2021 the project will be scaled up
to other rayons (as approved by the World Bank).
3. The network of local SES centers will play a key role in the implementation of the project. The
key implementing body of the program will be local offices of the SES, while trainings will be delivered
with the involvement of the MLSPP VTCs and private training providers. The project will take advantage
of ongoing coordination74 at the level of rayons as a consultative mechanism to ensure a participatory
planning process that takes into consideration local socioeconomic conditions in planning of SEP activities.
4. The project management structure will involve both central and local components. The
structure will involve (a) a Steering Group led by the MLSPP and involving the SES and the PIU that will
meet quarterly to take stock of project implementation, discuss any deviations, and take action (if
needed); representatives of the private sectors will also be part of the committee and (b) a Working Group
led by the PIU and involving other relevant sectoral counterparts (for example, Ministry of Economy,
Ministry of Agriculture, and the SSC).
5. The PIU will be responsible for procurement, disbursement, monitoring, and reporting on the
use of loan proceeds. The PIU will include a Director for this operation, who would have overall
responsibility for the implementation of the proposed project on the ministry’s side. Given the complexity
and multisectoral feature of the project design, the PIU would also include at least two sector specialists,
one focusing on self-employment and another on labor market programs. Further specialists on
procurement, financial management, M&E, and environmental and social safeguards should also be hired
by the PIU. The PIU will also hire consultants, business trainers and mentors, who will be providing
technical and business support to the SEP beneficiaries. Implementation arrangements will ensure
continuous strengthening of the MLSPP’s capacity to promote long-term sustainability of the reforms.
Financial Management
6. Risk analysis. The overall financial management risk for the project was Substantial before
mitigation measures, and with adequate mitigation measures agreed upon, the financial management
residual risk is rated Moderate.
74 The Regulation of Local Employment Centre of State Employment Service, Attachment No. 2. paragraph 7.5.1, requires that
the local SES centers discuss measures and activities with the local self-government bodies, to tackle unemployment.
Page 61 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_66>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
7. Staffing. A financial officer will be selected within the unit who will be assigned with financial
management responsibilities for the project. The financial officer is required to be a qualified specialist
with experience in implementation of World Bank or other international financial institution projects.
Once the project enters the active stage of implementation, and depending on the workload, the financial
management capacity of the PIU will be strengthened by hiring of additional financial management staff.
The terms of references for the financial management staff, with detailed descriptions of duties, are
included in the financial part of the POM. The implementing entity is responsible for the project’s financial
management arrangements and its staff will provide supplementary expertise and time, as required, for
the specificity of World Bank procedures for accounting, reporting, and disbursement procedures. The
PIU staff within the MLSPP needs to have sufficient qualifications and experience to perform tasks in its
scope. The MLSPP is assessed to have sufficient capacity to ensure the appropriate staffing.
8. Planning and budgeting. The project’s budget will be prepared by the MLSPP with support from
the PIU. The MLSPP needs to hire PIU staff as soon as possible to help in preparation of project planning
and budgeting and manage project funds in a best manner from aspects of funds allocation, liquidity, and
overall performance. Variances of actual versus budgeted figures should be monitored on a regular basis,
appropriately analyzed, and corrective actions taken. The PIU will prepare in-year financial plans and cash
forecast based on the project’s budget, thus ensuring adequate liquidity management and withdrawal of
funds.
9. Information systems. Acceptable accounting software administered by the PIU needs to be
procured and used for project accounting and reporting. Accounting records should include proper
analytics of expenditures according to contracts and each specific payment.
10. Accounting policies and procedures. The accounting books and records will be kept on cash basis
with additional information on signed contracts. Project financial statements will be presented in U.S.
dollars. The entity implementing the project should apply in practice a set of acceptable accounting
procedures and internal controls including authorization and segregation of duties for the project. To
improve safeguard of assets, more internal control procedures are instituted (for example, reconciliation
between accounts and records, and reconciliation of cash and bank balances) and described in the
financial manual. The financial part of the POM will set out the financial management and internal control
policies and procedures and is intended to guide staff and minimize the risk of errors and omissions, as
well as delays in recording and reporting. These written standards also clarify responsibilities, including
level of authority, clear control over cash, and bank accounts and ensure prompt and accurate financial
reporting.
11. Financial reporting and monitoring. Project management-oriented unaudited IFRs will be used
for project monitoring and supervision. The format of the IFRs will be agreed upon during negotiations
and attached to the minutes of negotiations. The reports will include consolidated financial information
on all project funds. The reports will also incorporate detailed information on amounts transferred to the
MLSPP, amounts paid to beneficiaries, and any unused funds which were transferred from the Designated
Account. The PIU will produce a full set of IFRs for each calendar quarter throughout the life of the project.
They will be due 45 days after each quarter ends. The IFRs will include the following reports presented in
the agreed format: (a) statement of sources and uses of funds, (b) uses of funds by activity, (c) Designated
Account statement, (d) unit of output by activity, and (e) narratives to the reports. The accounting for the
project is cash basis with additional information provided for commitments on signed contracts.
Page 62 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_67>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
12. Internal controls. An adequate system of internal controls and procedures should be instituted
as part of the project. The management control framework is described in a financial management section
of the POM. The current financial management section will serve as the basis for the development of the
respective chapter of the POM of the project that will be prepared by loan effectiveness. Key internal
controls to be applied for the project include (a) appropriate authorizations and approvals; (b) segregation
of duties (with no single person having the responsibility for all phases of transaction); (c) regular
reconciliations between records and actual balances, as well as with third parties; and (d) complete
original documentation to support project transactions. Additional controls are required to ensure that
the funds flow to selected beneficiaries and that the funds are used for intended purposes and are
detailed in the POM and in the financial manual as part of the POM. The controls include the following:
• Appropriate procedures for selection of beneficiaries (staff who perform evaluation, the
procedure and criteria, and summary reports);
• Procedures on determining funds needed and methods of calculating quarterly need for
funds;
• Transparency of flow of funds—the need for information about the transferred funds,
together with supporting documentation, including statements of accounts to be submitted
to the PIU from the commercial bank and treasury. The PIU will include detailed information
in the quarterly IFRs; and
• Reporting back to the PIU on the executed transfers from the Designated Account to
beneficiaries (supporting documentation, such as evidence of bank transfer confirming bank
account owner or signed payments slips by beneficiaries, and account statements), as well
as on the unused funds.
13. External audit. The implementing entity follows the audit requirements of the existing World
Bank-financed projects. The MLSPP is audited by the Chamber of Accounts as any other government
entity. However, as the capacity of the Chamber of Accounts for conducting efficient financial audit is still
quite limited, the project’s financial statements will be audited in accordance with terms of reference
acceptable to the World Bank by a private sector audit company acceptable to the World Bank, and the
audit report will be submitted to the World Bank at the latest six months after the end of the period
audited. The annual cost of the audits of the project will be covered by the project funds.
14. The project, apart from financial audit, includes performance and operational audit of grants at
least on a sample basis to ensure that the agreed outputs are delivered in an efficient manner. Separate
reports will be produced for the financial audit, operational audit, and performance review and finalized
within six months from the end of the audited period. It is expected that the operational and performance
audits will be contracted and started once the project enters the active phase of implementation.
15. Financial management conditions and action plans. To further strengthen the project financial
management arrangements, there is one condition for effectiveness which should be implemented as
indicated in table 2.1.
Page 63 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_68>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
Table 2.1. Financial Management Condition
Condition Due Date
Complete the financial management section of the POM, describing the specific financial Effectiveness
and disbursement procedures instituted for the new project
16. Flow of funds and disbursement arrangements. The transaction-based disbursement method will
be used for the Project. Once the project becomes effective a Designated Account will be opened in an
acceptable commercial bank, to which the funds will be transferred. A separate account in the treasury
will be opened to handle the Government’s share of project expenditures. The Designated Account will
be managed and operated by the PIU with the authorized signatories, which include a ministerial (MLSPP)
representative. The procedures relating to the flow of funds, including paths for authorization and
approval of payments will be described in detail in the financial management section of the POM. The
procedures should clearly describe all steps of the process, as well as authorized signatories for
administering the account funds. Bank statements showing turnover and balance on the account will be
submitted on a daily basis. The PIU will include balances on all project-related accounts in the quarterly
IFRs. The ceiling for the Designated Account will be indicated in the Disbursement and Financial
Information Letter to be agreed on at negotiations. Applications for replenishment of the Designated
Account will be submitted at least quarterly or when one-third of the amount has been withdrawn,
whichever occurs earlier. Documentation requirements for replenishment would follow standard World
Bank procedures as described in the Disbursement Handbook. Bank statements of the Designated
Account, which have been reconciled, should accompany all replenishment requests.
17. The withdrawal of proceeds from the IBRD loan will be made according to the schedule shown in
table 2.2.
Table 2.2. Schedule for Withdrawal of Proceeds
Category Amount of the Loan Percentage of Expenditures to be
Allocated Financed
(US$) (Net of value added tax)
(1) Goods, works, non-consulting
services, consulting services for the 100
project and operating costs for the
project
(2) Refund of the Preparation Advance Amount payable pursuant to Section 2.07
(a) of the General Conditions
[(3)] Front-end fee Amount payable pursuant to
Section 2.03 of this Agreement in
accordance with Section 2.07 (b) of the
General Conditions
[(4)] Interest Rate Cap or Interest Rate Amount due pursuant to Section 4.05
Collar premium (c) of the General Conditions
Total amount 100,000,000
18. Government counterpart funding. The Government’s contribution is limited only for financing of
value added tax under the project and will be disbursed from budget allocations through the treasury
system in the Ministry of Finance. Funds would be released to finance expenditures as they are incurred.
Page 64 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_69>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
19. Retroactive financing. The Government is considering retroactive financing that would help
initiate some activities, which will be essential for a quick start of the project implementation following
effectiveness. These activities will include (a) PIU salaries and operations, (b) development/update of
training modules for the SEP beneficiaries, and (c) initial technical assistance and capacity-building
activities for the PIU and SES staff to support program launch. Retroactive financing will apply to payments
made by the borrower not more than 12 months before the expected date of the loan signing.
20. Supervision plan. During project implementation, the World Bank will supervise the project’s
financial management arrangements in two main ways: (a) review the project’s unaudited IFRs for each
calendar quarter, as well as the project’s annual audited financial statements and auditor’s management
letter and (b) perform on-site supervisions and review the project’s financial management and
disbursement arrangements to ensure compliance with the World Bank’s minimum requirements. The
supervision may include the PIU within the MLSPP and a random sample of final beneficiaries, as
considered necessary. The World Bank-accredited financial management specialist will perform
supervisions
Procurement Arrangements
21. Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank’s “Procurement Regulations
for IPF Borrowers”: Procurement in Investment Project Financing Goods, Works, Non‐Consulting and
Consulting Services’, dated July 1, 2016, and revised in November 2017 and August 2018. A PPSD based
on market analysis has been developed with support of the World Bank. A detailed Procurement Plan has
also been prepared for the first 18 months of the project implementation based on the PPSD’s outcome.
Project procurement communication and Procurement Plan implementation will be performed through
the STEP system.
22. Key procurement under the project. The project’s total value is US$100 million of which
approximately US$90 million contributes to the procurement of goods contracts for the different type of
assets for beneficiaries followed by consultancy of US$3 million. No works contract is anticipated. All
procurement will be conducted centrally by the MLSPP/PIU.
23. Civil works. No works contract is anticipated.
24. Procurement of goods and non-consultant services. Goods required under the project will
include different type of assets for beneficiaries. This is the major procurement under this project and will
follow national and international competitive bidding with few packages. Market analysis confirmed that
there are adequate number of international and national bidders for this major procurement. Other goods
procurement are vehicles, office supplies, consumables, and so on. According to the PPSD, an appropriate
procurement method has been selected and mentioned in the Procurement Plan.
25. Selection of consultants. There are few low-value firms and individual consultants. According to
the PPSD, an appropriate procurement method will be selected and mentioned in the Procurement Plan.
Page 65 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_70>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
Client Capability and PIU Assessment
26. Procurement is planned to be conducted centrally by the MLSPP/PIU, which will be responsible
for all procurements under the project. Though the MLSPP had experience in implementing World Bank-
funded projects and had past working exposure to the World Bank’s old Procurement Guidelines, the
MLSPP has no experience in the World Bank Procurement Regulations which is effective since July 1, 2016.
The MLSPP will be responsible for few moderate value goods and consultancy contracts with national and
international competition following World Bank Procurement Regulations, which needs relevant
expertise. Considering these factors, the procurement risk rating is assessed as Substantial. It has been
agreed that the MLSPP will assign a staff as a procurement focal person for the project. In addition to that,
the MLSPP will ensure full-time dedicated service of an experienced procurement consultant throughout
the project life. Once the PIU is formed, the World Bank will arrange customized procurement training on
the Procurement Framework including the PPSD and STEP.
27. The MLSPP/PIU needs customized training from the World Bank to prepare bidding documents
for goods procurement following international competition. Similarly, the MLSPP/PIU will need
customized training in bid evaluation and contract management. KPIs will be included in goods contract
for assets to ensure value for money (VFM) and efficiency.
Table 2.3. Key Risk and Proposed Mitigation
Procurement Core Possible Risk Proposed Mitigation Measures
Principle
(a) High priced bid (a) Introduce KPI for sustainable procurement
(b) High maintenance cost (social and environment) part in contract
(c) Less life time of the product management.
(d) Low quality of the finished (b) Comprehensive training for the borrower on
product VFM.
(e) High cost of ownership over the (c) Awareness program for the prospective
life of the product. bidders on VFM procurement.
VFM
(f) Negative impact in terms of
social and environment aspects
(g) Lack of knowledge of the
MLSPP/PIU to ensure VFM
(h) Inadequate understanding of
the bidders related to VFM
procurement
(a) High bid price (a) Conduct bidder’s awareness to ensure better
(b) High cost of ownership completion which may ensure reasonable price
Economy
(c) Contract will not be completed
on time, cost over run
(a) Possibility of wrong doing by the (a) Conduct customized training on fraud and
bidder corruption (for the borrower.
Integrity (b) Bidder awareness on fraud and corruption
and its remedial measures as part of pre-bid
meeting.
(a) limited local market and (a) Conduct bidder’s awareness both at national
Fit-for-purpose contract size will not attract and international levels.
international bidders.
Page 66 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_71>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
Procurement Core Possible Risk Proposed Mitigation Measures
Principle
(a) Frequent rebid (a) Set appropriate packing and qualification
(b) More time will be required to requirement based on market analysis to ensure
prepare bidding documents and adequate competition.
complete evaluation and change of (b) World Bank will provide customized training
faulty bidding documents and to the MLSPP/PIU in bidding document
evaluation preparation, bid evaluation, and contract
Efficiency (c) Contract will not be completed management.
on time. (c) Monthly reporting on contact monitoring
flowing the World Bank’s standard contract
monitoring tool.
(d) KPIs will be linked with payment.
(e) Use project management tool like MS
Project and closely monitor the critical path.
(a) All bidding information may not (a) All advertisements will be published in the
be public. MLSPP/PIU website.
Transparency
(b) Contract award information will be
published in the MLSPP/PIU.
(a) Change of incorrect bid (a) In addition to prior review contract, the
Fairness evaluation World Bank will also review critical contracts as
identified in the PPSD.
28. Procurement thresholds and prior review thresholds. The Procurement Plan shall set forth those
contracts which shall be subject to the World Bank’s prior review. All other contracts shall be subject to
post review by the World Bank.
Implementation Support Plan
29. The implementation of the proposed project will be supported through the following sets of
activities: (a) ongoing technical support, (b) specific fiduciary support, and (c) regular supervision and
implementation support. These activities will also be part of an ongoing policy dialogue with the MLSPP
and SES.
(a) The World Bank will provide ongoing technical support to both the MLSPP and SES during
implementation. This technical support will be provided by labor and social protection
experts and will focus on key implementation areas involving other staff within the World
Bank, as necessary.
(b) The World Bank will provide specific support to the PIU in the areas of financial management
and procurement to ensure compliance with applicable fiduciary standards. This support, to
be provided by specialized financial management and procurement specialists based in the
World Bank’s Baku office, will be provided through ongoing supervision of the project.
(c) The World Bank team will conduct regular supervision and implementation support missions
(at least twice a year) to review the progress in specific activities to ensure that the
development objective of the project is expected to be achieved on time. As the project
Page 67 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_72>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
makes progress toward its PDO, the implementation support plan may be adjusted as
necessary, depending on the areas that may need additional assistance.
30. Financial management implementation support and supervision plan. During project
implementation, the World Bank will supervise the project’s financial management arrangements in two
main ways: (a) review the project’s unaudited IFRs for each calendar quarter, as well as the project’s
annual audited financial statements and auditor’s management letter and (b) perform on-site
supervisions and review the project’s financial management and disbursement arrangements to ensure
compliance with the World Bank’s minimum requirements. The supervision may include the project
implementation unit within the MLSPP and a random sample of final beneficiaries as considered
necessary. The World Bank-accredited financial management specialist will perform supervisions.
31. Safeguards review would be carried out in accordance with the new Environmental and Social
Framework. The review will be carried out at least twice a year and will involve a desk review of all
documentation related to the activities within the social and labor management plans. The environmental
and social teams will provide opportune support and, as necessary, training to the PIU to ensure adequate
compliance with the related requirements.
32. Implementation support plan and budget. Table 2.4 presents the implementation support plan
and initial estimated costs. All expenditures are expected to come from the regular World Bank budget.
Table 2.4. Implementation Support Plan and Budget
Areas of Support Resource Supervision
Team Member Time Cost per
(weeks) Year
Project’s task team leader: (a) coordination of overall Senior economist 12 US$150,000
project supervision and implementation support, (b)
technical and operational support in the areas of labor
market programs and social assistance, (c) M&E, and (d)
lead policy dialogue.
Technical support (a) day-to-day implementation, (b) labor Consultant (local) 22
market programs and social assistance, (c) support the PIU
and link them with other World Bank specialists as
necessary, (d) ongoing technical dialogue with the
Government
Technical support in active labor markets and self- Senior economist 3
employment
Technical support in IT-related issues Consultant 4
Financial management support Financial 4
management
specialist
Procurement support Procurement 4
specialist
Page 68 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_73>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
ANNEX 3: ECONOMIC ANALYSIS
1. Activation and employment support programs and services are key instruments for improving
employment outcomes among groups of vulnerable people. Programs supporting self-employment and
entrepreneurship are important policy instruments to boost the income of the poor and vulnerable, for
whom self-employment can be a key source of income. Such programs help address labor market
constraints related to a lack of labor demand and, more specifically, addressing financial and
nonfinancial75 constraints. Existing evidence from OECD and EU member states suggests that well-
designed activation programs can have a positive impact on employment outcomes for program
participants, including those who are recipients of public income support. The evidence also indicates that
activation and employment support programs tend to produce modest positive results in a cost-effective
manner. The effectiveness of such programs tends to be hindered by high levels of informality, rural and
immobile target populations, and low labor demand due to macroeconomic conditions. Effective
employment promotion programs are generally aligned with the requirements of the authorizing
environment, including domestic policy challenges, opportunities, and institutional capacity; solid
understanding of the needs and requirements of current and prospective clients of activation
interventions; and choices of appropriate incentives along with policy instruments.
2. The proposed project is expected to yield substantial and quantifiable benefits. The project is
expected to increase the share of TSSA beneficiaries and other vulnerable groups either in self-
employment or in wage employment, providing pathways to productive (self-) employment activities
through the SEP and expanding the access to wage employment opportunities mainly through improved
employment services through the SES targeted to vulnerable jobseekers. The project is further expected
to increase the number of operational businesses, directly contributing to micro, small, and medium
enterprises growth in the country.
3. This annex presents the economic and financial analysis for the main component supported by
the project (Component 1: Enhancing the scope and effectiveness of the self-employment program).
The analysis is based on administrative data on the SEP shared by the Government of Azerbaijan.
Assumptions are made based on the existing international evidence on entrepreneurship programs.
4. The economic analysis is restricted to Component 1 of the project as this component comprises
96 percent of project funds and implements interventions which are more strictly measurable than the
activities under Components 2 and 3. Nonetheless, Components 2 and 3 are also expected to lead to
benefits due to increasing efficiency and effectiveness of the operation of the SES. The economic theory
suggests that improvements in the capacity of SES to serve vulnerable jobseekers (‘the hardest to serve’)
may lead to higher jobs placements and better matching between jobseekers and employers. Improving
job intermediation helps increase the speed and quality of job matches. Better-trained staff in the SES are
able to better serve disadvantaged jobseekers and increase their likelihood of finding and retaining a job.
The enhanced capacity of the SES staff will affect the job placement rate along three dimensions: a higher
75 Financial constraints include prohibitively high interest rates and collateral requirements for vulnerable groups while
nonfinancial constraints encompass the absence of business knowledge, practices, and management capital; limited access to
markets (value chains), networks, and mobility; and other factors.
Page 69 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_74>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
likelihood of placement, faster placement and therefore lower unemployment durations, and better job
matches, resulting in a longer job tenure and higher job satisfaction for both employees and employers.
5. The development and design of SES IT systems and a comprehensive labor market skills
assessment will lead to efficiency gains in the operations of the SES. The development of M&E
methodologies and systems that will improve the design and implementation of employment programs
are critical for the success of these programs. Furthermore, they will improve the perception of the SES in
the public realm, leading to more jobseekers and employers resorting to its services. The cost of upgrading
the existent IT systems with simple functionalities to produce more and better monitoring information is
relatively low compared to the budget dedicated to ALMPs. The cost of producing labor market analyses
is also low compared to the budget of the ALMPs but can yield high impact with regard to employment
outcomes.
Cost-benefit Analysis Methodology
6. This section describes the methodology of the cost-benefit analysis undertaken to estimate the
returns of the project. The analysis compares the cost and performance of the SEP currently implemented
by the Government of Azerbaijan with the enhanced SEP to be implemented by the project. It is expected
that the project will increase the benefit-cost ratio of the SEP through (a) improving training provided to
beneficiaries (redesigned SIYB and technical training), (b) providing individual follow-up visits for all
beneficiaries and mentoring and technical support to beneficiaries through dedicated experts, and (c)
diversifying the SEP by focusing on non-livestock beneficiaries which engage in higher return activities.76
7. As the project supports beneficiaries directly, the costs accrue exclusively to the Government
in the form of the cost of the project whereas the benefits accrue mostly to the beneficiaries in the form
of improved livelihoods, successful entrepreneurship, and access to jobs. There are also indirect benefits
to the Government in the form of increased tax revenue and lower social assistance expenditures. The
analysis does not include indirect benefits such as the long-term human capital increases of both
beneficiaries as well as children of beneficiary households, stemming from higher income security and job
stability. Two scenarios are considered for calculating the net benefits accruing from the SEP business: (a)
a three-year period and (b) a seven-year period. While the analysis assumes a share of beneficiary attrition
each year under both scenarios, the three-year scenario calculates the benefits from the projects only for
the first three years and assumes that the depreciated assets of surviving firms will be counted as benefit
at the end of the three-year period. Conversely, the seven-year scenario assumes that the depreciated
assets of all businesses remaining after seven years will accrue as a project benefit. Whereas the analysis
covering only three years provides a conservative estimate of benefits and can assess whether the SEP is
a valuable intervention in the short run, the seven-year period more likely reflects the full range of
benefits accruing over the life span of SEP businesses.
8. The costs of the project include (a) the amount spent on the direct asset transfer to beneficiaries,
assumed to be AZN 7,000 (including the cost of technical training, both private and in VTCs); (b) the cost
of business training delivered to beneficiaries (AZN 31 per beneficiary); (c) the cost of individualized
76 The economic analysis does not take into account the matching grants and prizes provided on a pilot basis.
Page 70 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_75>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
follow-up visits (AZN 95 per beneficiary);77and (d) the cost of individualized mentoring visits (AZN 76 per
beneficiary).78
9. Benefits of the project include (a) the remaining value of the assets that are transferred to
beneficiaries, taking into account depreciation of assets (assumed to be 10 percent per year),79 and (b)
the discounted value of the stream of earnings from selling products or services (AZN 4,368 per beneficiary
per year)
10. The assumptions for the cost-benefit analysis are based on government monitoring data from
the existing SEP. The average earnings of beneficiaries per month are based on the earnings of the existing
beneficiaries in the SEP for the government scenario (estimated at AZN 280 per month for non-livestock
activities based on information from current beneficiaries). For the World Bank-financed beneficiaries,
the analysis assumes that enhanced training and supervision will increase beneficiaries’ earnings by 3080
percent. The analysis assumes that the World Bank-financed project will decrease the current attrition
rate among SEP beneficiaries (estimated to be 50 percent based on a two-year period only, given that the
program has been in operation since 2017) due to enhanced beneficiary supervision and mentoring: the
analysis assumes 25 percent attrition per year for the government program and 15 percent per year for
the World Bank-sponsored program.
Table 3.1. Assumptions for Calculating the Benefit Levels
Value
Government World Bank World Bank
Assumption
Program Project Project (lower
case)
Beneficiary attrition per year (%) 25 15 15
Depreciation of non-livestock assets per year (%) 10 10 10
Revenue of non-livestock assets per year (AZN, per 3,360 3.696 4,368
beneficiary)
Discount rate (%) 2
Table 3.2. Assumptions for Calculating the Cost Levels
Assumption Value
Government World Bank World Bank
Program Project Project
(lower case)
Cost of non-livestock assets including cost of technical 7,000 7,000 7,000
training (AZN, per beneficiary)
77 The project budgets four follow-up visits of four hours each, one per month during the first four months.
78 The project budgets six mentoring visits per beneficiary for 40 percent of beneficiaries.
79 This results in an asset value of AZN 4,480 at program completion (after two years).
80 International evidence shows that psychological training and mentoring for entrepreneurs are highly effective tools of
increasing business success and revenue (Brooks, W., Donovan, K. and Johnson, T. 2018. "Mentors or Teachers? Microenterprise
Training in Kenya." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 10 (4): 196-221.; Campos, F. et al. 2018. “Teaching
Personal Initiative Beats Traditional Training in Boosting Small Business in West Africa”, Science, Vol. 257, Is. 6357; and McKenzie
and Woodruff 2017). In particular, studies show that each of these tools can increase profits of microentrepreneurs by between
20 percent and 30 percent.
Page 71 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_76>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
Assumption Value
Government World Bank World Bank
Program Project Project
(lower case)
Cost of SIYB training (AZN, per beneficiary) 31 31 31
Individual follow-up visits (AZN, per beneficiary) n.a. 95 95
Cost of mentoring visits per year for 40% of beneficiaries n.a. 76 76
(AZN, per beneficiary)
Cost of technical vocational training through private n.a. 320 320
providers for 80% of beneficiaries (AZN, per beneficiary)
Cost-benefit Analysis Results
11. The analysis demonstrates that even under the conservative three-year scenario, the World
Bank project can substantially enhance benefit-cost ratios of the SEP. Table 3.3 gives the results of the
cost-benefit analysis of the Government’s current project (the baseline against which the World Bank
project is compared) and the enhanced World Bank SEP assuming a three-year benefit horizon. Overall,
the Government’s program has an implementation cost of AZN 7,031 and yields AZN 10,894 over a three-
year period, resulting in a net benefit of AZN 3,863, and a resulting benefit-cost ratio of 55 percent. The
World Bank-funded project would lead to a higher return rate of 99 percent, with net benefits of AZN
14,297. The higher benefit-cost ratio is due to the higher cost of improving training and mentoring for
beneficiaries more than paying for itself as beneficiaries have higher business survival rates and higher
returns from their entrepreneurial activities. Table 3.1 also outlines a lower-case scenario for the World
Bank project which assumes a smaller earnings’ increase for the World Bank SEP beneficiaries compared
to government-sponsored beneficiaries (10 percent as opposed to 30 percent).
Table 3.3. Cost-benefit Analysis of Component 1 (three-year scenario, per beneficiary)
Total Benefits Total Costs Net Benefits Net
per per per Benefit/Costs
Program
Beneficiary Beneficiary Beneficiary (%)
(NPV) (NPV) (NPV)
SEP - Government of Azerbaijan (baseline) 10,894 7,031 3,863 55
SEP - World Bank funded 14,297 7,200 7,097 99
SEP - World Bank funded (lower case scenario) 12,881 7,200 5,682 79
Note: Values are in Azerbaijani manat.
12. Under the scenario of assuming a benefit accrual of seven years, the SEP leads to high returns
that justify the significant upfront cost of the SEP. Table 3.4 provides the results of the cost-benefit
analysis of the project under a seven-year time horizon. As expected, returns of both the government-
and World Bank-funded project increase significantly. The Government program yields net benefits of
AZN 5,523 per beneficiary, yielding a benefit-cost ratio of 75 percent. The World Bank-funded program
leads to increased net benefits of AZN 12,089 and a resulting benefit-cost ratio of 168 percent.
Page 72 of 73
<<<PDF_PAGE_77>>>
The World Bank
Azerbaijan Employment Support Project (P171250)
Table 3.4. Cost-benefit Analysis of Component 1 (seven-year scenario, per beneficiary)
Total Benefits Total Costs Net Benefits Net
Program (NPV) (NPV) (NPV) Benefit/Costs
(%)
SEP - Government of Azerbaijan (baseline) 12,284 7,031 5,253 75
SEP - World Bank funded 19,2 88 7,2 00 12,089 168
SEP - World Bank funded (lower case scenario) 16,866 7,200 9,666 134
Note: Values are in Azerbaijani manat.
13. Overall, Component 1 of the project will yield an additional AZN 200 million in additional
benefits compared to the baseline case of government implementation. Table 3.5 gives the overall
estimated benefits of Component 1. As mentioned earlier, it assumes 22,000 additional beneficiaries
financed by the World Bank. This would yield overall net benefits of about AZN 424 million. Furthermore,
compared to implementation of the Government program, the project yields an additional AZN 150
million in net benefits.
Table 3.5. Overall Estimated Benefits of World Bank Program (seven-year scenario)
Program Total Costs Total Benefits Net Benefits (NPV) Additional Net
(NPV) Benefits Compared
to Government
Program
Component 1 167,350,000 424,300,000 266,000,000 150,400,000
Component 1 167,350,000 371,100,000 212,700,000 97,100,000
(lower case
scenario)
Note: Values are in Azerbaijani manat.
Page 73 of 73