FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Report No: PAD4849
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
ON A
PROPOSED CREDIT
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 33.5 MILLION
(US$45 MILLION EQUIVALENT)
AND
A PROPOSED GLOBAL RISK FINANCING FACILITY GRANT
IN THE AMOUNT OF US$7.5 MILLION
FOR A
COMPETITIVENESS AND FINANCIAL INCLUSION PROJECT
June 2, 2022
Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation Global Practice
Eastern and Southern Africa Region
This document is being made publicly available prior to Board consideration. This does not imply a
presumed outcome. This document may be updated following Board consideration and the updated
document will be made publicly available in accordance with the Bank’s policy on Access to Information.
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective April 30, 2022)
Currency Unit = L e s o t h o M a l o t i
US$1 = SDR 0.74388157
Maloti 15.89 = US$1
FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 31
Regional Vice President: Hafez M. H. Ghanem
Country Director: Marie Francoise Marie-Nelly
Regional Director: Asad Alam
Practice Manager: Douglas Pearce
Task Team Leaders: Ganesh Rasagam, Michael Ehst
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AfCFTA African Continental Free Trade Agreement
AfDB African Development Bank
AGOA African Growth and Opportunity Act
ALEB Association of Lesotho Employers and Business
ASYCUDA Automated System for Customs Data
B2B Business to Business
BDS Business Development Services
BEDCO Basotho Enterprise Development Corporation
C-PCG COVID-19 Partial Credit Guarantee Scheme
CAFI Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion
CBL Central Bank of Lesotho
CMT Cut and Trim
CPF Country Partnership Framework
DFS Digital Financial Services
DRF Disaster Risk Finance
DTT Department of Traffic and Transport
E&S Environment and Social
EFA Economic and Financial Analysis
ERR Economic Rate of Return
ESF Environmental and Social Framework
ESMF Environmental and Social Management Framework
ESO Entrepreneurship Support Organizations
ESRS Environment and Social Review Summary
FI Financial Intermediaries
FDI Foreign Direct Investment
FM Financial Management
FOB Free on Board
FY Fiscal Year
G2B Government to Business
G2P Government to Person
GBV Gender Based Violence
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GRiF Global Risk Financing Facility
GRM Grievance Redress Mechanism
GRS Grievance Redress Service
GTEX Global Textile and Clothing Program
GVCs Global Value Chains
IBRD International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICT Information Communications Technology
IDA International Development Association
IFC International Finance Corporation
ILO International Labor Organization
IMF International Monetary Fund
IPA Investment Promotion Agency
ITC International Trade Center
LAA Land Administration Authority
LEAP Lesotho Enterprise Assistance Project
LERIMA Lesotho Electronic Registry in Interest in Movable Assets
LGMA Lesotho Garment Manufacturers Association
LMIC Lower Middle-Income Country
LMP Land Management Plan
LNDC Lesotho National Development Corporation
LPI Logistics Performance Index
LRA Lesotho Revenue Authority
LSC Lesotho Startup Community
LTEA Lesotho Textile Exporters Association
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MCC Maseru City Council
MFD Mobilizing Finance for Development
MFI Micro-finance Institutions
MOF Ministry of Finance
MOHA Ministry of Home Affairs
MPWT Ministry of Public Works and Transport
MSBD Ministry of Small Business Development, Cooperatives, and Marketing
MSME Micro, Small and Medium enterprises
MTI Ministry of Trade and Industry
NPF New Procurement Framework
NPV Net Present Value
NSDP II Second National Strategic Development Plan
NUL National University of Lesotho
OBFC One-Stop Business Facilitation Centre
P2G Person to Government
PCGF Partial Credit Guarantee Fund
PCM Private Capital Mobilized
PDO Project Development Objective
PFMRAP Public Financial Management Reform Action Plan
PIM Project Implementation Manual
PMDU Prime Minister’s Delivery Unit
PMU Project Management Unit
PPD Public-Private Dialogue
PPSD Project Procurement Strategy for Development
PSCED Private Sector Competitiveness and Economic Diversification Project
PSCED2 Second Private Sector Competitiveness and Economic Diversification Project
SACU Southern African Customs Union
SADC Southern African Development Community
SADP2 Second Smallholder Agriculture Development Project
SCD Systematic Country Diagnostic
SCD-U Systematic Country Diagnostic Update
SCORE Sustaining Competitive and Responsible Enterprises
SEA Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
SEP Stakeholder Engagement Plan
SME Small and Medium Enterprises
TFP Total Factor Productivity
TICC Tourism Information and Crafts Center
TOR Terms of Reference
TVET Technical and Vocational Education and Training
UNCTAD United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
VC Venture Capital
VFM Value for Money
WBG World Bank Group
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... 1
I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT ...................................................................................................... 7
A. Country Context................................................................................................................................ 7
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context .................................................................................................. 12
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives ............................................................................................. 18
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 19
A. Project Development Objective ..................................................................................................... 19
B. Project Components ....................................................................................................................... 20
C. Project Beneficiaries ....................................................................................................................... 35
D. Results Chain .................................................................................................................................. 36
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners ................................................................... 37
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design .................................................................... 38
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ............................................................................ 40
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements .......................................................................... 40
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements......................................................................... 43
C. Sustainability ................................................................................................................................... 44
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY ................................................................................... 44
A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis ................................................................................... 44
B. Fiduciary .......................................................................................................................................... 45
C. Legal Operational Policies ............................................................................................................... 48
D. Environmental and Social ............................................................................................................... 48
V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES ..................................................................................... 50
VI. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 50
VII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING ................................................................... 52
ANNEX 1: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan ................................................. 63
ANNEX 2: Climate Risk in Lesotho ........................................................................................ 80
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
DATASHEET
BASIC INFORMATION
BASIC_INFO_TABLE
Country(ies) Project Name
Lesotho Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project
Project ID Financing Instrument Environmental and Social Risk Classification
Investment Project
P175783 Moderate
Financing
Financing & Implementation Modalities
[ ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) [ ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[ ] Series of Projects (SOP) [ ] Fragile State(s)
[ ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs) [ ] Small State(s)
[ ] Financial Intermediaries (FI) [ ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[ ] Project-Based Guarantee [ ] Conflict
[ ] Deferred Drawdown [ ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[ ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA) [ ] Hands-on Enhanced Implementation Support (HEIS)
Expected Approval Date Expected Closing Date
24-Jun-2022 31-Jul-2028
Bank/IFC Collaboration
No
Proposed Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to increase access to business support services and financial products targeted
at MSMEs and entrepreneurs, especially women and youth.
Components
Component Name Cost (US$, millions)
Page 1 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
Enhancing Financial Inclusion and Resilience of MSMEs 20.00
Scaling Support for Entrepreneurship and MSMEs 29.50
Project Management and Implementation Support 3.00
Organizations
Borrower: Kingdom of Lesotho
Implementing Agency: Ministry of Trade and Industry
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)
SUMMARY
-NewFin1
Total Project Cost 52.50
Total Financing 52.50
of which IBRD/IDA 45.00
Financing Gap 0.00
DETAILS
-NewFinEnh1
World Bank Group Financing
International Development Association (IDA) 45.00
IDA Credit 45.00
Non-World Bank Group Financing
Trust Funds 7.50
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery 7.50
IDA Resources (in US$, Millions)
Credit Amount Grant Amount Guarantee Amount Total Amount
Lesotho 45.00 0.00 0.00 45.00
National PBA 45.00 0.00 0.00 45.00
Page 2 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
Total 45.00 0.00 0.00 45.00
Expected Disbursements (in US$, Millions)
WB Fiscal Year 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028
Annual 0.00 4.50 8.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00
Cumulative 0.00 4.50 12.50 22.50 32.50 42.50 52.50
INSTITUTIONAL DATA
Practice Area (Lead) Contributing Practice Areas
Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation
Climate Change and Disaster Screening
This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks
SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK-RATING TOOL (SORT)
Risk Category Rating
1. Political and Governance ⚫ High
2. Macroeconomic ⚫ Substantial
3. Sector Strategies and Policies ⚫ Moderate
4. Technical Design of Project or Program ⚫ Substantial
5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability ⚫ Substantial
6. Fiduciary ⚫ Moderate
7. Environment and Social ⚫ Moderate
8. Stakeholders ⚫ Moderate
9. Other ⚫ Moderate
10. Overall ⚫ Substantial
Page 3 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
COMPLIANCE
Policy
Does the project depart from the CPF in content or in other significant respects?
[ ] Yes [✓] No
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
[ ] Yes [✓] No
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
E & S Standards Relevance
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts Relevant
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure Relevant
Labor and Working Conditions Relevant
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management Relevant
Community Health and Safety Relevant
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement Not Currently Relevant
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural Not Currently Relevant
Resources
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional Not Currently Relevant
Local Communities
Cultural Heritage Not Currently Relevant
Financial Intermediaries Not Currently Relevant
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
Page 4 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
In accordance with the Project Financing Agreement, by no later than one (1) month after the Effective Date, the
Recipient shall: (a) adopt, in accordance with terms of reference acceptable to the Association, a manual, which
contains Project arrangements and procedures for: (i) institutional coordination and day-to-day implementation of
the Project; (ii) monitoring, evaluation, reporting and communication; (iii) criteria, procedures and responsibilities
for Sub-project selection; (iv) eligibility criteria, allocation process, and restrictions on the use of funds for financing
the Relief Grants, the ESO Grants and the LEAP Grants; (v) administration, procurement, financial management and
accounting; and (vi) such other administrative, technical and organizational arrangements and procedures as shall
be required for purposes of implementation of the Project (“Project Implementation Manual” or “PIM”); and (b)
thereafter, carry out the Project in accordance with the PIM and not amend, abrogate, or waive said PIM or any
part thereof without the prior written approval of the Association.
Sections and Description
In accordance with the Project Financing Agreement, for purpose of implementing Part 2.3(a) [Textiles Value Chain
support] of the Project, and by no later than sixty (60) days after the Effective Date, the Recipient shall enter into,
and thereafter maintain throughout the period of Project implementation, an output agreement with ILO, under
terms and conditions approved by the Association (the “ILO Output Agreement”), whereby the Recipient shall: (a)
hire the services of ILO to implement Part 2.3(a) of the Project in accordance with the provisions of the PIM, and
the requirements of the ESS; (b) report regularly to the PMU on the progress achieved in the implementation of
Project activities and any challenges, incidents and/or obstacles thereto; and (c) agree on the direct
payment/advance of the proceeds of the Financing from the Association to ILO to facilitate the implementation of
activities under Part 2.3(a) of the Project, as well as on the financial reporting and auditing requirements.
Conditions
Type Financing source Description
Disbursement IBRD/IDA No withdrawal shall be made for Capitalization of the Seed
Financing Facility (SFF) under Subcomponent 2.1 unless the
Recipient has submitted evidence showing that: (i) the hiring of the
SFF Manager has been carried out under terms and conditions
satisfactory to the Association; and (ii) the SFF has been established
and made operational in a manner satisfactory to the Association.
Type Financing source Description
Disbursement IBRD/IDA No withdrawal shall be made for Horticulture Incubator Program
(HIP) activities under Subcomponent 2.3 unless the Recipient has
submitted evidence showing that the hiring of the HIP Manager has
been carried out under terms and conditions satisfactory to the
Association.
Type Financing source Description
Effectiveness IBRD/IDA The Financing Agreement shall not become effective until the Co-
financing Agreement (Grant Agreement) has been executed and
delivered and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness or to the
Page 5 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
right of the Recipient to make withdrawals under it (other than the
effectiveness of this Agreement) have been fulfilled.
Type Financing source Description
Effectiveness Trust Funds The Co-financing Agreement (Grant Agreement) shall not become
effective until evidence satisfactory to the Bank has been furnished
to the Bank that the conditions specified have been satisfied:
(a) the execution and delivery of the Co-financing Agreement on
behalf of the Recipient have been duly authorized or ratified by all
necessary governmental action; and
(b) the financing agreement to the Project dated the same date
as this Agreement, between the Recipient and the Bank, providing
financing in support of the Project (“Financing Agreement”), has
been executed and delivered and all conditions precedent to its
effectiveness or to the right of the Recipient to make withdrawals
under it (other than the effectiveness of this Agreement) have been
fulfilled.
Page 6 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT
A. Country Context
1. Despite being a lower-middle income country, Lesotho persistently experiences high levels of unemployment,
informality, inequality, and poverty, which have been further exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) growth declined from a peak of 6.3 percent in 2012 to -11.1 percent in 2020 (Figure 1).
Lesotho’s poor economic performance has been the result of compounding factors including declining revenues from
the Southern African Customs Union (SACU)1, recurrent climate related shocks that have drained fiscal resources2, a
high public sector wage bill that has inhibited spending on development objectives, and contraction of key economic
sectors (manufacturing and tourism) due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Unemployment is at 22.5 percent3, and while
the poverty rate in Lesotho fell from 56.6 percent to 49.7 percent between 2002 and 2017, economic vulnerability
persists with more than 75 percent of the population either poor or vulnerable to poverty, driven in large part by
exposure to climatic shocks. Declines in remittances due to COVID-19 related border restrictions have further
exacerbated poverty. Although income and other measures of inequality have fallen, Lesotho remains one of the most
unequal countries in the world.4 Overall, Lesotho’s economic and social development is not commensurate with the
country’s lower-middle-income-status.5
Figure 1: GDP growth in Lesotho has slowed
substantially
Source: World Development Indicators.
2. The public sector has a disproportionate role in the economy, crowding out private participation and resulting in a
weak and largely informal private sector. The government has been the main driver of economic activity, with public
1 SACU revenues fell from 30 percent of GDP in Lesotho’s fiscal year (FY) ending March 2013 (FY 2012/13) to 17.7 percent of GDP in FY
2017/18 and are expected to decline further to 15.2 percent of GDP in FY 2019/20.
2 The average annual cost of disaster response is estimated at US$19.3 million, or 1.6 percent of the total budget expenditure in the
2019/20 fiscal year.
3 22.5 percent unemployment (strict definition) or 38.3 percent (expanded definition) in 2019. World Bank Group. 2021. Lesotho
Systematic Country Diagnostic Update: Bridging Implementation Gaps to Accelerate Development.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/36910.
4 World Bank. 2019. Lesotho Poverty Assessment.
5 International Monetary Fund. 2019. Kingdom of Lesotho: 2019 Article IV Consultation. Volume 2019: Issue 113.
https://doi.org/10.5089/9781498312370.002
Page 7 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
spending accounting for 60 percent of GDP and with public sector investment levels averaging around 29 percent of
GDP since 2010.6 The public sector contribution to GDP now far exceeds that of the textile and apparel industry, which
is the largest private sector industry in Lesotho (Figure 2).7 Lesotho’s public sector wage bill (as a percentage of GDP)
is one of the highest in the world and public sector workers earn an average monthly salary that is approximately
seven times higher than the minimum wage of a skilled worker in the textile sector.8 The recent mid-term budget
review projects the compensation of employees to account for 45.9 percent of total government expenditures for
2020/21.
Figure 2: Value Added by Industry (% of GDP), 2000-2017
Source: World Bank calculation using
Lesotho Bureau of Statistics data.
3. Lesotho’s private sector is largely concentrated in two sectors – mining and textile/apparel manufacturing and
economic diversification has proven challenging due to structural constraints. These two sectors which account for
84 percent of all formal sector employment (Figure 3) and over two-thirds of all exports (Figure 4) are facing serious
challenges. Textile and apparel exports have been declining due to productivity and labor market challenges and Kenya
has overtaken Lesotho as the leading apparel exporter to the United States under the African Growth and Opportunity
Act (AGOA). Total employment in the export manufacturing sector dropped from a peak of 43,500 in February 2020
to a low of 31,000 in April 2020 before rebounding to 39,000 in September 20209 with additional job losses reported
in 2021 primarily because of the pandemic. Job losses in the sector have had an especially adverse impact on women
who comprise 80 percent of the workforce but occupy lower-skilled jobs compared to men.10 Growth and job creation
prospects from the mining sector (primarily diamond exports) are limited.
6 World Bank. 2018. Kingdom of Lesotho Public Expenditure Review: Improving Expenditure Efficiency for Inclusive Development and
Growth. World Bank, Washington, DC. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/30222 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.
7 The public sector employed about 43,597 people as of second quarter of 2020, and it is the second-largest employer after manufacturing,
at 48,685 employees during the same period. Lesotho’s population was 2,142,252 in 2020. (World Bank, forthcoming)
8 World Bank. 2019. Lesotho Poverty Assessment.
9 LNDC survey of 64 firms in eight industrial estates, November 2020; most of these factory workers are women. Lesotho National
Development Corporation (2021). Impact of COVID-19 on Manufacturing Industry in Lesotho: Case study of LNDC Assisted Companies
10 World Bank. 2018. Female Migration in Lesotho: Determinants and Opportunities. Policy Research Working Paper;No. 8307. World
Bank, Washington, DC. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/29217 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.”
Page 8 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
Figure 3: Employment in Lesotho is Figure 4: Exports in Lesotho remain highly
concentrated in mining and textiles and concentrated in textiles and diamonds
apparel (2018)
Source: World Bank (2018)11 Source: World Bank (2018)
4. Lesotho’s growth could be fueled by increasing the competitiveness of the small and medium enterprise (SME)
sector, scaling domestic startups, and expanding and capturing more value within high potential global value chains
(GVCs). A more dynamic SME sector can shift the balance of economic output and job creation to the private sector
as highlighted in the National Trade Strategy (2021-25) with opportunities especially in the horticulture and export
manufacturing value chains. To create jobs and attract investments, targeted efforts are needed to strengthen
competitiveness of GVCs, improve production capabilities, improve access to reliable infrastructure, strengthen
business and trade facilitation for export promotion, and improve the overall regulatory framework to create a
competitive business environment.12 Addressing the low productivity of the large informal sector (more than 80
percent of household businesses in Lesotho were not registered) is critical.
5. Lesotho’s business environment remains weak despite recent reforms, with political instability, tax rates and
practices of the informal sector highlighted as the top three constraints. The Second National Strategic Development
Plan (NSDP II) (2019-2023) identified an “uncompetitive business environment” as one of the key binding constraints
for private investments. Recent reforms include new legislation for business registration and licensing and secured
lending as well as starting adoption of digital systems and procedures in trade facilitation, land administration, and
construction permits, all supported under the World Bank’s Second Private Sector Competitiveness and Economic
Diversification Project (PSCED2) (P144933). Further support is needed for effective implementation of these reforms.
Lesotho’s ranking in the Global Competitiveness Index13 dropped from 123 to 131 out of 141 countries from 2014 to
2019, and the Logistics Performance Index14 ranking also dropped from 133 to 139. Political instability, tax rates,
practices of the informal sector and access to finance are amongst the major constraints faced by firms.15
11 World Bank. 2018. Unlocking the potential of Lesotho’s private sector: a focus on apparel, horticulture, and ICT (English).
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/832751537465818570/Unlocking-the-potential-of-Lesotho-s-private-sector-a-focus-on-
apparel-horticulture-and-ICT
12 World Bank (forthcoming). Export Competitiveness of the Textile and Apparel Sector in Lesotho,
13 World Economic Forum. 2019. Global Competitiveness Report.
https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_TheGlobalCompetitivenessReport2019.pdf
14 World Bank. 2019. Logistics Performance Index Global Rankings. https://lpi.worldbank.org/international/global/2018.%202019
15 World Bank Enterprise Survey, 2016
Page 9 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
6. Access to finance remains a challenge, particularly for small firms, due to limited financial intermediation and
limited use of digital financial services (DFS). Although the financial sector is liquid and profitable16, domestic credit
to the private sector is one of the lowest among the SACU countries and is half as much as other lower middle-income
countries (LMICs). In 2019, Lesotho’s domestic credit to the private sector was 21.5 percent of GDP, compared to 42
percent for all LMICs. The financial sector largely channels domestic savings outwards to South Africa rather than
lending to the domestic private sector while the textile and apparel firms are largely financed through foreign
channels. The pension fund for public employees owns sizable assets of which only around 3 percent is invested in
Lesotho. There seems to be a mismatch between the financing needs of the mostly micro and small enterprises and
the stringent requirements of the lenders including documentation, cash flow projections, risk assessment and the
availability of collateral. These businesses resort to informal channels for financing given that microfinance institutions
are not perceived as credible due to poor market practices in the past.
7. Access to finance by women is particularly challenging, due to constraints on women’s access to formal credit, low
credit history, and high rejection rate of women loan applicants.17 Rural women in low-income categories are most
vulnerable in this regard. As a result, women-owned businesses tend to start and stay small, with their lack of access
to collateral resulting in overreliance on informal sources of finance and credit. For instance, as of 2021, only 27
percent of Basotho women have credit records.18 The lack of women’s credit history may partially be due to the very
recent inclusion of more gender-informed credit reporting systems as well as a lack of market and user data for design
of targeted policy interventions in Lesotho. This results in greater legal and regulatory barriers to women’s access to
financial inclusion.19 To address this, the government of Lesotho has set a target of 30 percent of women recorded in
the credit bureau by 2022.20 To move beyond inclusion in credit records to improving overall creditworthiness, there
is a need for reform in the mechanisms for evaluating women’s bankability and creditworthiness. Mobile money is
playing a critical role in driving financial inclusion in Lesotho, while microfinance has not met with much success.21 It
is estimated that 31 percent of women have mobile money accounts compared with 24 percent of men, and 40
percent of women made or received digital payments compared with 35 percent of men.22 There is potential to
enhance the impact of mobile banking especially for rural businesses.
8. Increasing productivity growth by enhancing skills and digital technology adoption is critical for private sector
development. Total factor productivity (TFP) has been nearly stagnant and lags other countries in the region (Figure
5), characterized by negative labor productivity growth (-3.5 percent between 2013 and 2015) especially for small
firms. Rural areas tend to have a higher share of low productivity jobs while urban areas tend to have a higher share
of wage-earning jobs apart from jobs in the agriculture sector. Exporting businesses, particularly in the textile and
apparel sector, are at risk of losing competitiveness without new investments in skills and technology, putting critical
16 The three major banks are subsidiaries of South African banks and the fourth, the only domestic bank, is fully owned by the
Government. All four banks are well capitalized, with an average Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) of 18 percent as of December 2018. Total
assets of the four banks were about US$1.2 billion as of December 2018, equivalent to 48 percent of the country´s GDP.
17 World Bank. 2018. Unlocking the potential of Lesotho’s private sector: a focus on apparel, horticulture, and ICT (English).
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/832751537465818570/Unlocking-the-potential-of-Lesotho-s-private-sector-a-focus-on-
apparel-horticulture-and-ICT
18 Central Bank of Lesotho. 2021. Credit Information Sharing Quarterly Report: March 2021.
19 Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. 2019. Women’s Digital Financial Inclusion In Africa
20 Central Bank of Lesotho. 2021. Credit Information Sharing Quarterly Report: March 2021.
21 Finmark Trust, Southern African Development Community Secretariat and United Nations Capital Development Fund. 2019. Measuring
Progress: Financial Inclusion in Selected SADC Countries
22 World Bank. 2018. Global Findex Database 2017: Measuring Financial Inclusion and the Fintech Revolution. Washington, DC: World
Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/29510 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.”
Page 10 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
jobs at risk.23 Improved digital connectivity combined with improvements in digital skills and literacy, access to digital
payments and other financial services, platforms such as digital identity schemes and support to digital entrepreneurs
can lead to new businesses and jobs.
Figure 5: Lesotho’s TFP growth lags other SACU countries, 2002-2017
Source: World Bank (2019)24
9. While Lesotho has the highest rates of female participation in ownership of formal firms (39.1 percent) in sub-
Saharan Africa, female-owned businesses in Lesotho tend to start and stay small and are concentrated in a few
sectors. The highest proportion of firms in Lesotho with majority female ownership (45 percent) are small while only
9 percent of large firms have a female majority. Most of the women entrepreneurs in Lesotho are livelihood or
subsistence entrepreneurs, and very few are growth or opportunity entrepreneurs.25 Despite limited data,
consultations suggest that barriers faced by women entrepreneurs include access to credit, discrimination by financial
institutions, high levels on unpaid care work resulting in lack of ability to engage in enterprise development, and
limited access to business development, training, knowledge, and access to networks and markets (which are common
to all entrepreneurs). The uptake of mobile banking and the implementation of the Land Act, 2010 (which granted
new rights to women to own and inherit property) are creating new opportunities for women.26
10. Lesotho is highly exposed to climatic and other economic shocks (Annex 2). From 1980-2020 Lesotho was impacted
by 22 shocks, 90 percent of which were climatic, and there is an expected increase in frequency of intense precipitation
events leading to heightened risk of flooding, increased aridity, temperatures, and drought.27 These climatic shocks
will result in crop damage, hunger, wildfires and disease outbreaks which are expected to adversely affect ‘working
23 FinMark Trust. 2021. Measuring Progress: Financial Inclusion in Selected SADC Countries.
Measuring_Progress_Financial_Inclusion_in_selected_SADC_countries_-_2019_Report.pdf (finmark.org.za)
24 World Bank. 2019. Lesotho Poverty Assessment: Progress and Challenges in Reducing Poverty (English). Washington, D.C.: World Bank
Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/387071576240590486/Lesotho-Poverty-Assessment-Progress-and-Challenges-in-
Reducing-Poverty
25 A necessity or livelihood entrepreneur is someone who has pursued entrepreneurship to acquire productive employment and livelihood
for themselves; a growth entrepreneur sets out to create and grow a business that will generate jobs.
26 Lesotho Land Administration Authority (2010). Land Act 2010 (Act No. 8 of 2010)
27 Climate Change Knowledge Portal: For Development Practitioners and Policy Makers
Page 11 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
days’, impacting businesses.28 During the 2020-2021 period, Lesotho declared two state of emergencies for shocks
(COVID-19 and heavy rains) that severely impacted businesses primarily due to damage to infrastructure disrupting
trade logistics. The agricultural sector, including horticulture, is particularly exposed to climatic shocks. Horticultural
crops are sensitive to climatic shocks because of their high-water demand and strict temperature requirements. In
Lesotho, the vulnerability to temperature extremes, hail, and drought (expected to increase with climate change) are
pertinent challenges to the sector, highlighting the importance of strengthening its climate resilience.
11. MSMEs have been particularly hard hit by these compounding shocks, with no resilience-building mechanisms in
place. MSMEs were severely impacted by declining sales, closures, reduction in employment as well as supply chain
and financial shocks while the suite of support measures fell below expectations in terms of impact given their ad-hoc
and unbudgeted nature. Furthermore, they put pressure on fiscal space, as they were not pre-financed, as the country
embarks on a path of fiscal consolidation and debt sustainability. This experience, and the fact that the government
does not have a comprehensive disaster risk financing strategy, demonstrates that MSMEs are highly vulnerable to
future climatic shocks.29
12. Political volatility is impeding private sector development. When Fitch Ratings maintained its negative outlook on
Lesotho in August 2021, it noted “Recurring bouts of political volatility and infighting within the government amid an
overall weak institutional capacity constrain the government's ability to adjust fiscal policy and push forward reforms,
and exacerbate problems with public-finance management.”30 High levels of leadership turnover in key ministries,
such as the Ministry of Small Business Development, Co-operatives, and Marketing (MSBD) and the Ministry of Trade
and Industry (MTI) has contributed to delays and shortcomings in addressing constraints to private sector
development through, “insufficient access of small and medium-sized enterprises to finance, lack of equitable and
effective regulation and enforcement, and lack of capacity in Government to implement reforms.”31
13. Economic and institutional transformation for private sector led job creation and inclusive growth requires a multi-
faceted approach to address the myriad constraints. Shifting the growth model from a public sector dominated
approach to a private sector-led one requires a suite of integrated interventions in improving the enabling
environment for private investments through more effective implementation of policy and regulatory reforms,
enhancing financial inclusion, strengthening the ecosystem for firms and entrepreneurs to enable them to participate
more effectively in high potential regional and global value chains and enabling businesses to tap opportunities from
digital transformation through expanding support for skills development and technology adoption.
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context
14. Substantial progress was made on business environment reforms under the PSCED2 project, but additional
investments are needed for effective implementation. Government to business (G2B) systems for registering a
business, renewing licenses, trading across borders, and making tax payments are in place. The Company Registry
system at the One-Stop Business Facilitation Centre (OBFC), the online automated Construction Permit system at the
Maseru City Council (MCC), the Lesotho Electronic Registry in Movable Assets (LERIMA), and the credit bureau at the
28 EM-DAT: The Emergency Events Database – Université Catholique de Louvain (UCL) - CRED, D. Guha-Sapir, Brussels, Belgium. and UNHCR
(2018). Lesotho Flash Update 01 – Hailstorms and Flash floods (period: March 1, 2018 –March 31, 2018).
29 World Bank Covid Business Pulse Survey Dashboard. March 7, 2022.
30 Fitch Rains. August 2, 2021. Fitch Affirms Lesotho at 'B'; Outlook Negative. https://www.fitchratings.com/research/sovereigns/fitch-
affirms-lesotho-at-b-outlook-negative-02-08-2021
31 African Development Bank. 2013. Kingdom of Lesotho, Country Strategy Paper, 2013-2017. Abidjan: African Development Bank.
Page 12 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
Central Bank of Lesotho (CBL) are notable achievements. The upgrading of the Automated System for Customs Data
(ASYCUDA) at the Lesotho Revenue Authority (LRA), an online business licensing system, and an integrated land
information system linked to an online payment system at the Land Administration Authority (LAA) were other
significant investments. These past investments in G2B systems and services in Lesotho proved critical during COVID,
allowing people to continue to use business services without the need for in-person interaction. Additional
investments are needed to deliver seamless and integrated business services through strengthening inter-agency
coordination and high-level oversight, increasing the technical capacity for implementation, and broadening and
streamlining the services provided by the OBFC as well as establishing a national payment gateway. Parallel efforts
are needed to implement an Insolvency Act and the Business Licensing and Registration Act.
15. Regulations and systems to support access to finance for the private sector need to be strengthened. Lesotho has
made significant improvements in providing access to credit, particularly credit reporting, under the PSCED2 project.
Important legislation including the Security Interest in Movables Act have been adopted and efforts are underway to
expand coverage to include businesses which will especially benefit women entrepreneurs who have lower levels of
access to immovable property. Sustainability of some credit related systems needs improvement to ensure reliability,
including the Credit Reporting System under the CBL. Interoperability across digital platforms would be highly
beneficial for facilitating financing to the private sector. For example, having the National ID, the LRA, business
registries, and banking systems able to talk to each other would improve the business environment, increase access
to finance and even domestic revenue mobilization.
16. Reforms to Lesotho’s investment framework and institutions are needed to attract investment into high-potential
economic sectors. Lesotho does not have an Investment Promotion Bill or a designated Investment Promotion Agency
(IPA) although an investment policy is being developed. The existing FDI regulatory framework does not provide for
any fiscal, administrative (licenses, permits, approvals) or property and utility incentives (land, water, electricity, last
mile infrastructure). Investments are subject to subjective treatment and based on unclear non-transparent criteria
and ad-hoc legal agreements. The business licensing regulations restrict foreign investment in some important sectors
such as commercial farming. The need for “a modern, competitive investment policy and legal regime”, recognizing a
critical lack of a structured legal, regulatory, and institutional framework on investment policy and promotion32 is
evident but is unlikely to be realized soon under prevailing political economy challenges.
17. The Second National Strategic Development Plan (NSDP II) (2019 – 2023) emphasizes the need for Lesotho to tap
into its existing comparative advantages to broaden sources of growth and has identified horticulture,
manufacturing and technology and innovation as high potential sectors. The main binding constraints inhibiting
private sector investment in these priority sectors are access to finance, access to land, infrastructure (including access
to utilities and energy), access to skills, poor health and the regulatory environment (Error! Reference source not
found.) need to be addressed concurrently through a multi-faceted approach and leveraging synergies between
various interventions across Government and development partner financed programs. The NSDP II estimates that
addressing these constraints could unlock private sector investment and entrepreneurship and create more than
20,000 new jobs.
32 World Bank. 2020. Lesotho Policy Notes. World Bank, Washington, DC. World Bank.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/34434
Page 13 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
Figure 6: Binding constraints inhibiting growth in four prioritized sectors in the NSDP II
Source: Lesotho Second National Strategic Development Plan
18. Additional investments are needed to build on the foundations laid under the PSCED2 project in supporting
investments in high-potential economic sectors, including strengthening the tourism and horticulture value chains
and supporting MSME growth. Under PSCED2, in tourism, construction of the tourism information and crafts center
(TICC) was completed, a star grading system was established, and a digital system was developed for the tourism
promotion agency. In horticulture, three commercial fruit production farms were established, and the Agriculture
Finance Department within the Lesotho Post Bank was established which disbursed more than 30 million maloti to
more than 140 agribusinesses. Finally, the MSME sector was supported through the PSCED2 Lesotho Enterprise
Assistance Program (LEAP) matching grants facility which assisted more than 12,000 businesses to access finance and
improve their capabilities. Further investments in each of these sectors are needed to unlock their potential for growth
and job creation.
19. The current pilot commercial horticulture projects can be scaled and replicated through a targeted horticulture
business incubation program. The pilot farms established under the first and second Private Sector Competitiveness
and Economic Diversification (PSCED) projects have successfully demonstrated the commercial potential to produce
deciduous fruits and vegetables in Lesotho for both the domestic and export markets. There is significant interest
from smallholder farmers to venture into commercial horticulture and several projects are currently being supported
through the Second Smallholder Agriculture Development Project (SADP2) (P165228). While there is significant
potential to attract large scale investments in commercial agriculture, these investments would require a competitive
investment regime including the availability of land parcels of adequate size, a transparent and credible land
ownership and leasing system and ancillary infrastructure investments. While these longer-term initiatives are being
implemented, there are immediate opportunities to support new and emerging smallholder farmers to participate in
the horticulture value chain through a systemic horticulture business incubation program delivered through a public-
private partnership that supports selected high potential farmers through business development and technical
support services, access to markets and access to finance.
20. While the tourism sector has promising potential, recovery is likely to be slow given the global challenges facing the
travel and hospitality industry. Lesotho’s tourism potential is under exploited and there is scope to increase private
investments and create new jobs. The tourism sector’s challenges include scarcity of skills, limited online presence,
poor infrastructure, inadequate facilitation of visitors at borders, and limited experience with eco-tourism. Addressing
these barriers could stimulate job creation once the regional and global tourism industry returns to a new normal
through the pandemic. According to the UN World Tourism Organization, every tourism job creates approximately 1.5
additional jobs in related sectors.33 Lesotho’s tourism industry will continue to rely heavily on South African and
neighboring markets and, while the industry gradually recovers, there is scope to strengthen the investment policy
33 United Nations World Trade Organization. 2019. Tourism and Jobs: a better future for all. https://www.unwto.org/world-tourism-day-
Page 14 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
regime to attract FDI in this sector, improve the availability and quality of skills required by the industry, and invest in
required infrastructure to facilitate private investments.
21. The export manufacturing sector, especially textile and apparel, has potential to attract new investments and create
jobs. The pandemic has exposed the underlying challenges that are stifling the export competitiveness of the export
manufacturing sector, including liquidity (especially for the Basotho owned firms), ability to adopt digital solutions,
improving labor conditions and resolving pay disputes and compliance with social and environment requirements of
global supply chains. Dedicated efforts are required to build regional value chains (particularly intra-SADC), improve
manufacturing capabilities and access to reliable infrastructure (especially water, energy, waste management, and
factory space). There are opportunities to strengthen business and trade facilitation for export promotion, promote
industrial clustering and integrated supply chains, and improve the overall regulatory framework to create a
competitive business environment. Targeted public-private efforts to improve the competitiveness of the textile and
apparel sector include: (i) strengthening the cut-make-trim (CMT) business; (ii) expanding value-added products in
yarn and fabric; (iii) generating capabilities to trade through Delivery Duty Paid Basis; and (iv) promoting the training
of middle management human resources and upgrading the overall workforce skills.34
22. There is a nascent entrepreneurship ecosystem which can be nurtured to support young Basotho entrepreneurs.
Concerted action from key public and private sector actors is required to address the critical gaps, including in terms
of gender equality, in the entrepreneurship ecosystem in five intersecting areas: (i) strengthening the policy and
regulatory environment and institutional capacity and coordination, (ii) expanding access to early stage finance, (iii)
building an entrepreneurial culture, developing skills, and a talent pipeline, (iv) helping entrepreneurs access new
market opportunities, and (v) enhancing the capacity and quality of business support services. The existing support
programs are all relatively recent, small in terms of investment size and beneficiaries, primarily concentrated in
Maseru and (in their current form) of limited scope, impact and scalability as well as not fully leveraging the
considerable resources that are available in the regional entrepreneurship ecosystem, especially in South Africa. The
continuous mentoring, business counselling, and access to financing opportunities that are required by the startups
for the initial years is conspicuously missing. Access to early-stage finance is extremely limited, particularly for women,
and a critical gap as entrepreneurs do not have information about, or access to, existing financing opportunities in the
region. There are untapped opportunities to leverage private funding to establish seed funding instruments with angel
investors and the Basotho diaspora and to attract venture capital funds and foundations which are active in South
Africa. However, the absence of a healthy pipeline of investible ventures is a key constraint for potential investors.
23. Strengthening the capacity of MSMEs, particularly through support to digital transformation, is important to enable
them to grow and be resilient. Accelerating digital reforms and enhancing digital skills can unlock new business
opportunities, enable business owners to reach new markets, and help MSMEs offer digital products. The World Bank
Business Pulse Survey found that while firms are very keen to adopt digital technologies35, government support is
lacking. Putting in place a regulatory framework to facilitate digital transactions, promote fintech solutions, and
support businesses to adopt digital tools and business models and leverage regional digital platforms can support the
creation of new jobs in the digital sector. Complementary efforts are required to provide better quality and more
affordable broadband access and enhance the availability of digital skills in partnership with the private sector. Digital
businesses, including digital startups and SMEs that want to incorporate digital technologies, are hampered by poor
34 World Bank (forthcoming). Scoping Study to identify markets and investment opportunities for textile and apparel in Lesotho
35 World Bank. 2021. Africa's Pulse, No. 23, April 2021: An Analysis of Issues Shaping Africa’s Economic Future. Washington, DC.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/35342
Page 15 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
digital infrastructure outside of urban areas. Only 8 percent of businesses currently use mobile money for business to
business (B2B) payments.36
24. Expanding access to MSME financing, particularly through digital financial services, would support the viability and
growth of MSMEs. Most MSMEs are micro, informal, and focused on survival rather than growth. There are an
estimated 85,173 MSMEs in Lesotho, with an estimated collective monthly turnover of M192 million (approximately
US$11 million). The MSME sector employs approximately 55,000 people in mostly low paying jobs. Eighty-three
percent of them do not employ any workers and less than 3 percent employ 5 or more people.37 These businesses are
largely struggling to survive in a difficult business environment and lack financial and non-financial support including
efficient infrastructure and impactful business development services to build capabilities and access new
opportunities and markets. The rate of informality has not changed significantly over the last 20 years (Figure 7) with
most businesses still not part of the formal financial sector and reliant on low levels of savings which limit their capacity
to grow and create jobs (Figure 8).
Figure 7: More than 80 percent of household businesses Figure 8: Most businesses in Lesotho, whether
in Lesotho were not registered in both 2002 and 2017. informal or formal, do not access formal finance
Source: World Bank (2019) Source: World Bank (2019)
25. MSMEs currently face multi-dimensional challenges accessing finance, particularly for women-led businesses. Key
findings from focus group discussions include very stringent requirements by banks, low efficacy of the current partial
credit guarantee scheme, high co-financing requirements (MSMEs must put in 30-40 percent of total loan amount),
costly digital transactions (6 percent fees for some systems), and limited support from the Lesotho National
Development Corporation (LNDC) and the Basotho Enterprise Development Corporation (BEDCO). An important
finding from the focus groups was that women had a particularly challenging time accessing financing for their MSMEs,
even before the COVID-19 pandemic. Women stated that they were required to include their husband’s name and
income statements to access a loan and were less likely to be approved by a bank, particularly if they were unmarried,
as they were perceived to be riskier borrowers. Evidence shows that this is a systemic challenge (Figure 9).
36 FinScope Trust. 2016. Micro, small and medium enterprises (MSME) survey.
https://finmark.org.za/system/documents/files/000/000/283/original/finscope-lesotho-pocket-guide_en.pdf?1609752854
37 FinScope Trust. 2016. Micro, small and medium enterprises (MSME) survey.
https://finmark.org.za/system/documents/files/000/000/283/original/finscope-lesotho-pocket-guide_en.pdf?1609752854
Page 16 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
Figure 9: Lesotho MSME Financial Access (%)
Source: FinScope (2016)38
26. Strengthening the resilience of MSMEs can limit damage to these businesses from the climatic and other economic
shocks that periodically impact Lesotho’s economy. The COVID-19 and recent droughts and floods have shown how
acutely MSMEs are affected by climatic shocks, highlighting the importance of developing resilience building
mechanisms. The focus group sessions conducted during the pre-appraisal mission shed insight on the topic, with the
majority of MSMEs noting the exposure of their business to climatic shocks. In addition, the team learned that MSMEs
experienced challenges with receiving relief grants during the COVID-19 pandemic. Formal MSMEs cited the grant
requirements to be onerous, particularly the mandated two years of bank statements. Even if MSMEs provided all
required documentation, they only received a payment for one-month, rather than the intended three months due
to lack of resources available. MSME owners noted that when impacted by the compounding shocks of COVID-19,
drought, and floods, they were forced to retrench, reduce hours and/or reduce pay, force early retirement, shift their
business model (leading to a more diversified business). Some had to abandon their buildings and/or close their
operations. In the absence of resilience building investments, the expansion of the MSME sector will continue to be
hampered by recurrent climatic shocks.
27. Through targeted investments, the government can strengthen the resilience of both MSMEs and horticulture to
climatic shocks. While the Ministry of Finance (MOF) does maintain a contingency fund for unforeseen expenditures,
these funds tend to be deployed early in the budget cycle (prior to the occurrence of climatic shocks) leaving no
earmarked funds for MSMEs. Relatedly, existing digital finance service (DFS) infrastructure does not allow for efficient
G2B payments in response to climatic shocks or for other purposes. Expanding the financing instruments (such as
sovereign insurance or contingency funds) available to government to rapidly deploy financial support to MSMEs
during climatic shocks is critical. Key DFS reforms to allow G2B payments include: (i) implementation of a national
switch to allow non-bank service providers access to retail payment infrastructure and simplifying e-money and agent
banking regulations to increase the usage of DFS; (ii) facilitate the entry of fintech in the market by removing
regulatory barriers; and (iii) move to accept and use digital payments in government to person (G2P) and person to
government (P2G) payments, including tax payments and social transfers. Promoting investments and entrepreneur
capacity to implement climate smart horticulture business plans will be crucial to develop a vibrant horticulture
industry moving forward.
Scope of the Project
28. The proposed project has adopted a selective approach by targeting interventions that link closely to business
expansion and resilience and job creation, specifically those related to supporting entrepreneurship, MSMEs, and
high potential value chains. The proposed interventions are targeted at increasing financial inclusion and resilience
38 FinScope Trust. 2016. Micro, small and medium enterprises (MSME) survey.
https://finmark.org.za/system/documents/files/000/000/283/original/finscope-lesotho-pocket-guide_en.pdf?1609752854
Page 17 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
as well as strengthening the support for MSMEs and entrepreneurship along the high potential value chains. Under
increasing financial inclusion and resilience, the proposed interventions focus on strengthening delivery of G2B
services, increasing access to finance for MSMEs with a focus on ensuring inclusion of women owned MSMEs and
enhancing resilience of the business sector from climate and other shocks. Support for MSMEs and entrepreneurship
is focused on enhancing the scope and quality of business support services, access to early-stage finance and
improving the overall competitiveness and climate resilience of horticulture and export manufacturing value chains.
Drawing from the experience of the PSCED and PSCED2 projects, institutional, legal, and regulatory reforms pertaining
to access to finance, investment policy and business environment reforms could be more effectively supported
through a parallel accompanying technical assistance program such as under the current Jobs Platform. The project
interventions proposed therefore target market and coordination failures through direct support to entrepreneurs
and firms while leveraging private sector service delivery capacity to augment limited public sector capacity. Although
the tourism value chain has not been explicitly targeted, entrepreneurs and existing MSMEs in the sector will be able
to fully benefit from the project interventions.
29. Leveraging analytical and advisory support under the Jobs Platform. The proposed project draws extensively upon
the analytical and advisory activities that were implemented under the World Bank’s Southern Africa Jobs Platform.39
The on-going support to the Lesotho Prime Minister’s Delivery Unit (PMDU) is facilitating the Cabinet Sub-Committee
on Business Environment Reforms and public-private dialogue on key value chains (tourism, export manufacturing
and horticulture) as well as key themes such as business environment reforms, access to finance, and youth
employment and entrepreneurship. The Jobs Platform supported a review of the draft Investment Policy, an
assessment of the competitiveness of the textile and apparel sector, an assessment of business incubation services,
participation of Lesotho in a regional Start-up Community and developing a business environment road map for
Lesotho, all of which are directly relevant to the project design and implementation.
C. Relevance to Higher Level Objectives
30. The project contributes directly to High Level Objective (HLO) One and Three as well as aligning with the gender
informed approach outlined in the upcoming Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY22-26). Under HLO 1, Increased
Employment in the Private Sector, the project will contribute to CPF Objective One (Improved enabling environment
for private investment and competitiveness) and CPF Objective Two (Increased opportunities and capabilities for
MSMEs and entrepreneurs). Under HLO 3, Improved Climate Resilience, the project will contribute to CPF Objective
Seven - Increased climate-sensitive spatial planning, service delivery, financial and infrastructure resilience, through
strengthening the risk financing instruments under Component 1.3. The project seeks to reduce climate vulnerability
by contributing to adaptation interventions that increase MSME’s financial resilience to climatic shocks such as
droughts and floods, with a focus on women owned MSMEs given their additional challenges accessing finance from
banks. Under the gender informed approach of the CPF, the project has identified strategic entry points and actions
towards addressing those priority gender gaps in Lesotho as set out in the World Bank Lesotho Gender Assessment
2022. The project aims to provide economic opportunities for women through support for women-owned startups
and women-owned MSMEs to assist them in launching businesses, adopting new digital technologies, and improving
managerial practices.
31. The Systematic Country Diagnostic Update (SCD-U) (2021) highlighted the weak business environment as a key
disincentive for private investment. The SCD-U prioritizes the need to shift from a public sector-driven to a private-
39 World Bank. Jobs and Economic Transformation ASA (P171855)
Page 18 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
sector driven, export-oriented and job-creating economic growth model. The SCD-U offers the following policy
recommendations: (i) accelerating implementation of business reforms; (ii) establishing a modern, competitive
investment policy and legal regime; (iii) accelerating the implementation of key legal and regulatory financial sector
reforms, together with the rollout of digital financial services to expand inclusion; (iv) increasing agricultural
productivity, value addition and commercialization to promote agribusiness development, MSMEs and food security;
(v) building on past success to revitalize the manufacturing sector and ensuring the sector regains its competitiveness;
(vi) attracting private investments in key value chains to create new jobs; and (vi) improving trade facilitation and
trade policy. The proposed project is also aligned with IFC’s strategy for Lesotho including the mobilizing finance for
development (MFD) approach and focus on increasing private capital mobilized (PCM) through supporting public
investments that are necessary to catalyze new private investments in key value chains.
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
A. Project Development Objective
PDO Statement
32. The project development objective is to increase access to business support services and financial products targeted
at MSMEs and entrepreneurs, especially women and youth.
PDO Level Indicators
33. The proposed project supports results in two areas: (i) improving financial inclusion and resilience through
improvements in G2B digital services, credit infrastructure and payment systems and government supported financial
products that increase MSME creation, growth, and resilience to climatic and other shocks, and (ii) direct support for
entrepreneurship and MSMEs to increase startup creation and growth and the capabilities of MSMEs to grow and
participate in the high potential export value chains. Please refer to Section II.D for the Theory of Change. Please refer
to Section II.E for how the project results complement ongoing or upcoming World Bank Group and development
partner projects that support private sector development in Lesotho.
34. The following indicators will be used at PDO level:
• Number of firms benefiting from private sector initiatives (Of which are women owned, Of which are youth
owned)
• Value of financing (seed funding, grants, partial credit guarantee, credit infrastructure improvements, resilience
funding) accessed by enterprises through the program (Of which is financing accessed by enterprises that are
women owned)
• Percentage of enterprises supported by the program with increased revenue in real terms (Of which are women
owned)
Results targets as well as intermediate indicators are included in the results framework in Section VII.
Page 19 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
B. Project Components
35. The project has three components that will support the Government’s efforts to expand the private sector in Lesotho.
The components focus on reforms and transformations in the following areas:
a) Enhancing financial inclusion and resilience of MSMEs (US$20 million)
b) Scaling support for entrepreneurship and MSMEs (US$29.5 million)
c) Project management and implementation support (US$3million)
Component 1: Enhancing Financial Inclusion and Resilience of MSMEs (US$20 million)
36. Component 1 will enhance financial inclusion through strengthening the delivery of efficient and reliable G2B digital
services and improved access to financial services to facilitate the establishment and operation of new businesses and
reduce the time and cost of regulatory compliance especially for MSMEs. It will also provide support for firms to be
more resilient to shocks from climate, pandemic, and other natural disasters. The component will include activities
that support (i) optimizing the outcomes of investments in G2B digital systems and processes made under the PSCED2
project, to strengthen inter-operability, efficiency, and impactful service delivery for businesses, particularly those
receiving support under Component 2, (ii) improving financial access through upgrading the security and reliability of
credit infrastructure and expanding access to digital financial services, and (iii) instruments to expand financial
resilience for businesses especially MSMEs to cope with disasters and other shocks to the economy. The component
will finance technical assistance, goods, training and capacity building programs, and recurrent expenditures, including
operating costs objectives.
Subcomponent 1.1 – Enhancing Government to Business (G2B) Digital Services to more effectively serve MSMEs
(US$6.5 million of which US$4.5 million IDA equivalent and US$2 million Global Risk Financing Facility (GRiF) Grant)40
37. Subcomponent 1.1 will provide support to build on investments in G2B systems made under the PSCED2 project
that serve MSMEs. The systems’ investments, technical assistance, training, and capacity development will improve
the reliability and interoperability of key G2B systems, address regulatory and process bottlenecks, and strengthen
interagency coordination and the delivery capacity of the relevant Government agencies for more efficient G2B
services including increased digitization of government payments. The payments gateway, coupled with other G2B
service improvements, will enhance the efficiency of government support to businesses, while also strengthening the
business environment for MSMEs and entrepreneurs and reducing the cost of doing business. Investments in the G2B
systems will consider the impact of climate change, seeking to minimize the impact of flash flooding events and / or
wildfire (both more likely with climate change).
38. Activities under this subcomponent include:
• System upgrades for business facilitation, trade facilitation, and land registration: upgrades and business
process reengineering to enhance the functionality, sustainability, and inter-operability of key G2B systems
including business registration and licensing, construction permitting, land administration, trade facilitation
(customs and national single window), and cross-border transport and transit operations. Costs to keep the
40 The GRiF is as a Multi-Donor Trust Fund, housed at the World Bank, to help countries design and implement financial solutions to manage
disasters and climate shocks.
Page 20 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
current business registration system running during the transition period.
• Design and implementation of an interoperability framework: development of a G2B systems
interoperability framework with institutional agreements and architecture for secure data exchange between
agencies/G2B backbone systems (including OBFC’s business licensing and registration, LRA tax and trade
facilitation, LAA’s property registry, and CBL’s credit bureau and moveable assets registry (LERIMA).
• Design and implementation of a payment gateway: implementation of a government payment gateway, with
incentives for merchant payments, to consolidate and enhance the effectiveness of digital G2B payment
systems and related processes.
A detailed and costed action plan covering these activities will be discussed and agreed with the government, including
inputs from private sector stakeholders, at the outset of implementation of this subcomponent.
39. System upgrades for business facilitation, trade facilitation and land registration: (i) The OBFC business registration
system will be consolidated into the existing UNCTAD business licensing and business permitting system. The
implementation would start with a prototype and would continue by phasing out of OBFC’s current business
registration system for companies, which will be maintained until the transition to the UNCTAD system is complete.
The transition is expected to take less than two years. Each phase of this transition, which includes process review,
data analysis, prototyping, implementation, and testing, will be done jointly by UNCTAD and OBFC staff. Each of the
phases will include capacity building for the OBFC staff to ensure system transition is coordinated with OBFC’s business
processes. The new OBFC system will use the G2B Payment Gateway which will also be implemented under this
subcomponent;(ii) The LRA’s customs system, based on UNCTAD’s ASYCUDA World system41, will be upgraded
including automation of important modules such as e-Certificate of Origin and Risk Based Selectivity and the
connection of LRA’s national single window with the G2B Payment Gateway; and (iii) The LAA land registry system will
be upgraded to improve land survey, land registration, data integrity and data exchange with other downstream
agencies. As part of the data exchange implementation, the MCC’s construction permit system will also be upgraded.
Both the Land Registry and the Construction Permit systems will also be integrated to the G2B Payment Gateway.
40. Implementation of an interoperability framework: The design and implementation of a G2B interoperability
framework will be done in parallel to G2B systems enhancements and business process reengineering to integrate
isolated systems. The framework scope would focus on the G2B backbone systems with more impact on business
processes: financial and payment systems, CBL’s credit bureau and moveable assets registry (LERIMA), and business
regulatory agencies (OBFC’s business licensing and registration, LRA tax and trade facilitation systems, LAA’s property
registry). Key elements of the framework will include a high level G2B information architecture that identifies data
sources and data consumers, volume, and types of transactions for secure data interchange between business related
systems. A governance structure for the G2B framework will be developed including the operation of an inter-agency
steering committee, institutional arrangements (roles and responsibilities), and technical task forces to participate in
different phases of the implementation.
41. Implementation of a payment gateway: This activity will enhance the effectiveness and security of G2B processes by
consolidating G2B government payments into one payment gateway to be used by all G2B agencies which will allow
businesses to make payments via cards, electronic transfers, and mobile money for all G2B processes. The agencies
that will have access to the payment gateway include the OBFC, MCC, LAA and LRA to provide seamless online
payment facilities for businesses.
41 ASYCUDA World is a computerized customs management system that covers most foreign trade procedures. ASYCUDA software is
developed in Geneva by UNCTAD
Page 21 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
Subcomponent 1.2. Improving Access to Financial Services (US$3.0 million IDA equivalent)
42. This subcomponent provides technical assistance and investments to improve access to financial services for
MSMEs, particularly women owned MSMEs, by (i) strengthening the credit infrastructure system that facilitates
access to business financing,; (ii) promoting market innovation through the development of new financial products
targeting women-owned businesses; and (iii) expanding the impact of the LNDC-managed risk sharing facility through
the development of a portfolio guarantee including targeted efforts to support women-owned MSMEs.
43. Strengthening the credit infrastructure system (US$1.0 million): Technical assistance will be provided to the CBL to
build on the credit infrastructure reforms supported under the PSCED2 to further enhance the credit reporting system
and the movable asset registry. The credit reporting system will be strengthened by improving the quality and accuracy
of data, expanding reporting through the inclusion of alternate data, broadening the coverage to include corporate
data, and leveraging the existing platform for development of value-added services which seek to increase access to
finance. The support will include the (i) development of a simplified data template to improve data submissions and
completeness; (ii) amendment of the Credit Reporting Act to allow access by a credit bureau to alternative sources of
data and data processing of corporate entities; (iii) development of a credit scoring system to enhance utility of credit
reporting including the adaptation of tools and mechanisms that can adequately evaluate women’s creditworthiness;
and (iv) capacity building efforts to enhance CBL’s supervisory capacity, utilization of the system by credit providers
and consumers, and MSME awareness and understanding of the credit bureau. The project will also support the
enhancement of capabilities and utilization of the moveable assets registry (LERIMA), through system optimization
and integration with relevant databases. This support will include: (i) integration of data from the motor vehicle and
company registries into LERIMA, and (ii) capacity building and awareness of financial institutions and MSMEs, with a
focus on women owned MSMEs, to increase utilization of LERIMA. To ensure that these activities are advanced with
due consideration for broader financial inclusion objectives in Lesotho, and adequately leverage synergies from other
projects, technical assistance will also be provided to the MoF in support of national financial inclusion priorities.
44. Promoting market innovation through the development of new financial products (US$1 million): Recent legislative
improvements, specifically the implementation of the Security Interest in Movable Property Act, 2020, provide a solid
legal base for developing accounts receivable financing and other asset-based lending instruments. To promote
market innovation, capacity building will be provided to financial institutions to bolster knowledge and understanding
of the new legislation and support design and implementation of new products that take advantage of the legislation,
including products which strengthen the climate resilience of MSMEs (e.g. savings accounts for MSMEs exposed to
climatic shocks, insurance products which manage climate risk such as agriculture insurance, liquidity instruments /
facilities which provide short term lines of credit to MSMEs exposed to climate shocks). Activities to support
development of alternative and innovative credit products include: (i) capacity building to financial institutions for the
development of asset-based lending; and (ii) capacity building to MSMEs, with a process that includes targeting
women MSMEs, that are potential users of the lending products. Support will be provided to financial institutions and
potential borrowers for scaling value chain financing for horticulture (to complement the support for horticulture
incubation services under subcomponent 2.3). This technical assistance will build on the successful efforts under the
PSCED2 to establish the Agriculture Finance Department within the Lesotho Post Bank which provides cash flow-based
lending. Value chain financing leverages collateral inherent in the lending transaction being financed, for instance
future receivables, to extend borrowing and consequently connects to efforts to advance the development of LERIMA.
Activities to be supported include technical assistance to Post Bank for (i) development of a business case for
agricultural value chain finance, including market assessment, climate risk assessment and financing methodology; (ii)
Page 22 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
design and implementation of a management information system (MIS) to support value-chain financing; (iii) capacity
building for internal staff and prospective farmers (to be conducted together with the horticulture incubation
program); and (iv) methods to integrate climate mitigation and adaptation measures into business plans of MSMEs
(e.g. drought resistant seeds, accumulation of savings to respond to climatic shocks, diversification of planting
geographies to spread risk).
45. Expanding the impact of the LNDC risk sharing facility (US$1 million): To increase the impact of the LNDC risk sharing
facility (L-PCG), support will be provided to strengthen institutional and operational features of the scheme and allow
it to scale through the design and development of a portfolio guarantee. Under the portfolio approach, the guarantee
will be applied to all loans meeting predefined eligibility criteria. This offers: (i) systemic coverage, as the guarantee
will be provided to a large portfolio of eligible loans; (ii) reduced processing time, as compared to individual guarantee
issuance; and (iii) elimination of adverse selection by PFIs, as all eligible loans are automatically included under the
guaranteed portfolio. Technical assistance will be provided to (i) review and improve governance, institutional and
operational features of the L-PCG; (ii) develop a business case and financial model for portfolio guarantee; (iii) design
and implement the portfolio guarantee scheme including development of supporting documentation and systems –
i.e. operational manual, risk management framework, monitoring and evaluation system; (iv) procure requisite
hardware to support a robust MIS, and (v) capacity building for L-PCG staff, prospective PFIs, and MSMEs.
Subcomponent 1.3 - Strengthening the Resilience of MSMEs to Climatic Shocks (US$10.5 million of which US$5 million
IDA equivalent and US$5.5 million GRiF Grant)
46. The activities under this sub-component will support the design, capitalization, and implementation of risk financing
instruments with the objective of providing financial support to otherwise viable MSMEs during climatic shocks,
enable them to maintain operations and strengthen their financial resilience. The sub-component will target the
MSMEs that are most vulnerable to climatic shocks, particularly those that are women owned. While the focus of this
sub-component is to strengthen the financial resilience of MSMEs to climatic shocks, in the event of a resurgence of
COVID-19 or similar shock, resources to finance MSME support may be considered on an exceptional basis. It is
estimated that around 20,000 MSMEs will be supported through this subcomponent.
47. The sub-component activities are designed to ensure the government can more independently finance and deliver
financial assistance to otherwise viable MSMEs that are adversely affected by climatic shocks over the course of the
project, reducing the reliance on budget reallocations or humanitarian funding. To achieve this, the subcomponent
will allocate: (i) US$4 million for MSME financial resilience which will be disbursed as grants via the PMU to climatic
shock affected, but otherwise viable, MSMEs. Eligibility criteria for disbursements will be detailed in the operations
manual of the project and include eligible climatic shocks, the data upon which to assess the severity of climatic shocks,
the disbursement process, target MSMEs, resources provided to each MSME depending on its size, etc.; (ii) US$6
million to finance the sovereign insurance which is expected to initially focus on drought and subsequently expanded
to consider floods. Technical assistance will be provided to the MOF for the design and procurement of this sovereign
insurance and payouts from the sovereign insurance will be disbursed into the Contingency Fund held by the MOF;
and (iii) US$0.5 million of technical assistance to strengthen disaster risk finance capacity in the Government.
48. The activity will also support the strengthening of the existing national business registry through developing a
database for informal MSMEs which will be initially managed by the PMU. Over its duration, the project will support
the Government to integrate the database for informal MSMEs into the business registry. The project will finance data
collection exercises to update the database which will include banking details, geographic location, and sector. The
Page 23 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
database combined with the G2B payment systems established under subcomponent 1.1 will enable rapid
disbursement of resources to climatic shock affected MSMEs. This activity will build on the success of the recent
COVID-19 relief grants provided to MSMEs, which leveraged mobile money channels to enable rapid, transparent, and
efficient payments. A Disaster Risk Finance (DRF) Coordinator will be recruited as part of the PMU to coordinate the
implementation of this subcomponent.
49. In parallel to the CAFI project, the World Bank will provide technical assistance under a GRiF financed advisory services
and analytics (ASA) project to support the MOF with two key risk financing activities. First, to draft and adopt a
National Disaster Risk Finance Strategy articulating the MOF’s strategic priorities for financing disaster response.
Second, to draft and adopt regulations for the Contingency Fund held at MOF (including fund governance, the
disbursement and procurement processes, financial management of resources, and auditing and reporting
requirements). Included in the regulations will be the establishment of an MSME Resilience Window. A sequenced
implementation approach will be adopted, first focusing on supporting the MoF draft and adopt a National Disaster
Risk Finance Strategy and regulations, after which focus will be placed on design and purchasing of sovereign
insurance. Upon adoption of the regulations, the project will discuss with the Government options to provide
resilience funding for MSMEs through the Contingency Fund.
Page 24 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
Table 1. Summary of Component 1 Activities
Proposed budget
Component Activities
(US$)
Component 1 Enhancing Financial Inclusion and Resilience of MSMEs 20.0 million
• Upgrades to enhance the functionality, sustainability, and inter-operability of key
G2B systems including business registration and licensing, construction permitting,
land administration, trade facilitation (customs and national single window), and
cross-border transport and transit operations
Subcomponent 1.1. • Development of a G2B systems interoperability framework with institutional
Enhancing G2B Digital agreements and architecture for secure data exchange between agencies/G2B 4.5 million (IDA)
Services to More backbone systems (including OBFC’s business licensing and registration, LRA tax and and
Effectively Serve trade facilitation, LAA’s property registry, and CBL’s credit bureau and moveable 2.0 million (GRiF)
MSMEs assets registry (LERIMA))
• Implementation of a government payment gateway, with incentives for merchant
payments, to consolidate and enhance the effectiveness of digital G2B payment
systems and related processes
• This sub-component will be co-financed with a GRiF grant.
• Strengthen the credit infrastructure system that facilitates access to business
financing including upgrades and capacity building to expand use of the credit
reporting system and the LERIMA moveable assets registry
• Promote market innovation through the development of new financial products
including capacity building for financial institutions and MSMEs to utilize asset based
Subcomponent 1.2.
lending and technical assistance to PostBank and prospective borrowers for value
Improving Access to 3.0 million
chain financing for commercial farmers and agribusinesses
Financial Services
• Expand the impact of the LNDC risk sharing facility through the development of a
portfolio guarantee by providing technical assistance to LNDC, PFIs, and MSMEs to
revamp and utilize the facility
• Technical assistance to the MoF on access to finance to ensure that these activities
are advanced with due consideration for national financial inclusion objectives
• This sub-component will be co-financed with a GRiF grant.
• Strengthen private sector resilience to climatic disasters and shocks:
o Provide US$4.0 million for MSME financial resilience
Subcomponent 1.3.
o Provide US$6.0 million for sovereign insurance to protect MSMEs from shocks
Strengthening the 5.0 million (IDA)
o Work with the national business registry to establish a database for informal
Resilience of MSMEs to and
MSMEs eligible for financial support during climatic shocks
Climatic Disasters and 5.5 million (GRiF)
o Provide technical assistance on the design and procurement of a sovereign
Shocks
insurance backstop, and co-financing of insurance premiums
o TA on disaster risk financing including adoption of a National Disaster Risk
Finance Policy
Component 2: Scaling Support for Entrepreneurship and MSMEs (US$29.5 million IDA equivalent)
50. Component 2 aims to strengthen the nascent entrepreneurial ecosystem and access to early-stage finance for startups
and youth owned businesses, support the digitization of MSMEs, and facilitate private investment in high-potential
value-chains including encourage upgrading of skills and adoption of sustainable production practices by businesses
to enhance productivity and green growth. The component will include activities that support (i) establishing an
Entrepreneurship Hub and Seed Financing Facility to increase the quality and scope of integrated startup business
support services and increase access to early-stage financing; (ii) scaling the current Lesotho Enterprise Assistance
Page 25 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
Program (LEAP) focusing on supporting MSMEs to adopt digital and green technologies and upgrade their capabilities;
and (iii) facilitating investment into productive value chains that are linked to local MSMEs. The component will finance
technical assistance, goods, training, recurring expenditures including operating costs, grants, and investments in a
“seed financing facility.”
Subcomponent 2.1. Establishing an Entrepreneurship Hub and Seed Financing Facility (US$12.5 million)
51. Subcomponent 2.1 will support the establishment of a sustainable entrepreneurship ecosystem. The
entrepreneurship ecosystem will provide integrated support to startups and innovative SMEs based in Lesotho.
Startups are defined as businesses with high-growth potential and intention. Innovative SMEs are defined as those
SMEs with higher risk, higher potential products, or business models than typical SMEs. These types of entrepreneurial
businesses will benefit from the specific types of business and financial support that the project will provide through
the entrepreneurship ecosystem.
52. The subcomponent will finance a new specialized Entrepreneurship Hub and a seed financing facility (investment
fund/accelerator) that will facilitate the development of a comprehensive entrepreneurship ecosystem. This will
include the following specific activities: (i) establish a sustainable and privately managed Entrepreneurship Hub; (ii)
upskill and certify 15 existing or newly established entrepreneurship support organizations (ESOs); (iii) create and
manage an incubation support program that includes competitive funding to incubate up to 500 businesses; (iv)
facilitate the integration of the Lesotho Startup Community within a wider regional entrepreneurship ecosystem; (v)
create a program to facilitate Basotho Diaspora engagement with the Lesotho entrepreneurship ecosystem; (vi)
facilitate the selection of an experienced private fund manager to establish and manage a seed financing facility and
an associated acceleration program; and (vii) provide initial funding to create the seed financing facility that will invest
in 50 startups over the period of the project.
53. Establish a sustainable and privately managed Entrepreneurship Hub (US$2 million). An Entrepreneurship Hub will
be established within the new Tourism Information and Crafts Center (TICC) building that was constructed with
financing from the PSCED2 project. The Entrepreneurship Hub will provide an attractive co-working, community
building, events, and networking space for use by Lesotho’s entrepreneurs and ESOs. The Hub will provide a central
location with facilities and digital infrastructure and support services, including access to broadband internet services.
Its mission will be to catalyze the development of the entrepreneurship ecosystem through entrepreneurship
awareness, training, financial and capacity building support to ESOs, and other support programs. The Hub will be
managed by a competitively selected private organization that will manage the space and run the ecosystem support
activities discussed below. The Hub will have a particular emphasis on bringing youth, women, and other
underrepresented populations into the entrepreneurship community and ecosystem. It will also work beyond Maseru
including through partnerships with organizations in other regions as needed.
54. A private sector operator will be selected to establish and manage the Entrepreneurship Hub space and run the
hub’s ecosystem building programs described below. The operator would be selected, through a competitive
selection process, based on relevant prior international experience as well as local knowledge. This will likely yield a
mixed team of international and local experts or organizations, which would be ideal for establishing the local
ecosystem and then connecting it internationally. The PMU would provide quality assurance and disburse funds to
the operator based on agreed milestones. The governance and administrative arrangements and eligibility criteria for
selecting the operator would be detailed in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM).
Page 26 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
55. Upskill and certify entrepreneurship support organizations (ESOs) (US$1.0 million). The Entrepreneurship Hub will
manage an ESO certification and training program to bring the quality of services of existing ESOs up to international
standards as well as to encourage new ESOs to be created. The goal is to improve ESO performance and their ability
to provide higher quality services to existing and aspiring entrepreneurs in the country, thus addressing the
entrepreneurs’ needs for skills upgrading (including soft skills), managerial capabilities, technology, and other needs.
The project plans to certify up to 15 ESOs. Ten existing ESOs have been identified during project preparation and it is
expected that additional ESOs will be established throughout the project implementation period. The program will
have an active outreach to ESOs to encourage participation and solicit applications. A diagnostic, training, and
competitively awarded technical assistance will help ESOs to assess their management and operations and improve
their performance to achieve certification.
56. Create and manage an incubation support program that includes competitive funding to incubate up to 500
SMEs/startups (US$5 million). The Entrepreneurship Hub will run an incubation support program that includes
periodic calls for proposals to finance ESO incubation programs. ESOs will only be eligible to participate in the calls for
proposals after they have been certified. ESOs with successful proposals are expected to be provided with US$100,000
to run an incubation program for 10 SMEs/startups over a period of one year. Half of the funding would go directly as
a grant to the SMEs/startups (i.e., US$5,000 per SME/startup), upon achievement of specific milestones. The other
half of the funding would go to the ESO to cover management costs and compensate coaches and mentors to advise
entrepreneurs on developing their concepts, business models, and business plans, and monitoring their progress. The
main objective of the incubation programs would be to scale up the SMEs/startups from concept stage to an investable
stage. SMEs/startups graduating from the incubation programs would constitute a deal flow for the seed financing
facility. A specific process to towards sharing information with and supporting women led startups and SMEs will be
shared with the ESOs to encourage programs that reach and meet the needs of women entrepreneurs. Five incubation
cycles will run in parallel for a period of a year, with quarterly review meetings between the Entrepreneurship Hub
managers and the ESO Project Teams. A new call for proposals for funding would be run every six months, allowing
additional ESOs to compete for the funding and the successful existing ESOs to obtain more funding for their
incubation programs. ESOs with women, youth, and climate related programs will be encouraged to apply for support.
The incubation program would incubate up to 500 SMEs/startups based on the expected number of cycles.
57. Facilitate the integration of the Lesotho Startup Community (LSC) within a wider regional entrepreneurship
ecosystem (US$1.0 million). The Entrepreneurship Hub would facilitate the establishment and operation of a Lesotho
Startup Community as part of the regional Innovation Bridge Startup Community, supported by the World Bank under
the Southern Africa Jobs Platform ASA. The LSC members would be introduced to the platform to strengthen
collaboration, networking, and sharing of knowledge and experience, and implement training programs to enhance
the capacity and impact of incubators, accelerators, and other entrepreneurship support organizations within the
ecosystem. This activity would also facilitate exchange programs between startups in the LSC, the Southern African
startup ecosystem, and the Basotho Diaspora. This would attract role models and partners to become actively involved
in supporting Lesotho’s entrepreneurship ecosystem. This might include, for example, a “Proud to be a Basotho
Entrepreneur” campaign to attract entrepreneurs back to Lesotho or the facilitation of a Basotho Business Angels
Network. A main objective would be putting the Lesotho entrepreneurship scene “on the map” to raise awareness of
the Lesotho ecosystem with Basotho in the Diaspora and attract non-Basotho investors.
58. Facilitate the selection of an experienced private seed fund manager to establish and manage a seed financing
facility and an associated acceleration program (US$0.5 million). An overall objective of subcomponent 2.1 is to
initiate an investment culture in Lesotho’s Entrepreneurship ecosystem. The activities of the Entrepreneurship Hub
Page 27 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
described above are intended to create a vibrant entrepreneurship ecosystem with 15 ESOs certified, and 500 newly
incubated entrepreneurs/startups/SMEs, some of which will be ready for follow-on investment. This will create the
environment necessary to attract a qualified fund manager to manage a seed financing facility and acceleration
program in Lesotho. This activity will provide financing to attract a fund manager for these programs and finance setup
costs for the fund and the acceleration program. The fund manager should have a proven track record of managing
similar programs and will be selected under an open and transparent international competitive bidding process and
based on clearly defined outputs and outcomes. Financing would be provided for a review of the investment
environment for venture capital (VC) activity, an outreach and communications campaign to attract interested fund
managers, and initial setup costs (e.g., legal costs, fund modeling, pre-launch management costs) for the seed
financing facility and accelerator. The fund and accelerator are expected to be established during the first year of
project implementation, with investment and acceleration activity taking place over the final four years of project
implementation.
59. Provide initial funding to capitalize the seed financing facility, that will invest in 50 startups over the period of the
project (US$3.0 million). This activity will provide US$3 million to capitalize the seed financing facility. The funding
will be provided as a grant to be used as permanent capital on terms that would be negotiated with the prospective
fund managers during implementation (e.g., on a first loss basis or on a rolling fund basis). However, a minimum
requirement will be for the selected fund management company to raise a minimum of US$ 1 million in matching
capital to bring the minimum fund size to US$4 million. The fund will be spent / invested over the final 4 years of the
project period as follows: US$2.5 million for direct investment into 50 startups/SMEs with ($50,000 investment in
each); US$0.5 million as follow-on investment in up to 5 startups/SMEs; and US$1 million as management fees (3
percent during the investment period and 2 percent during the divestment period). The investment into the 50
startups/SMEs is expected to be provided as follows: US$25,000 equity investment to be used for the
operations/growth of the startup/SME and US$25,000 grant for the costs of the acceleration program to be managed
by the fund manager for the benefit of the 50 startups/SMEs. The final amounts and arrangements for the investments
and acceleration program would be negotiated with the prospective fund managers. However, the guaranteed
revenue for the fund management and acceleration company under this setup is planned so that it is attractive to
early-stage fund managers in the region that would be establishing the first such seed financing facility in Lesotho. To
address gender gaps that women-owned startups/SMEs face, the seed fund will ensure a minimum of 20 percent of
investments support women-owned SMEs and start-ups. Similarly, the seed fund will ensure a minimum of 20 percent
of investments go to SMEs/startups that have built climate change adaptation and mitigation considerations into their
business model.
Subcomponent 2.2. Scaling Up the Lesotho Enterprise Assistance Program (LEAP) for MSMEs (US$5 million)
60. This subcomponent will support an enhancement of the existing Lesotho Enterprise Assistance Program (LEAP). LEAP
is a matching grants facility established under the World Bank’s PSCED2 to support MSMEs. The main eligible use of
LEAP financing under PSCED2 was the purchase of business development services (BDS). The LEAP program under
CAFI will allow for a wider range of eligible expenditures that support MSMEs to improve their productivity or growth,
as well as strengthen their resilience to climatic shocks. Supported MSMEs will be eligible to finance any investments
that target improved productivity or business expansion including BDS, purchases of technology (equipment,
machinery, software), training and skills development, strengthening disaster risk management and / or capacity
(drought resistant seeds for agribusiness SMEs, flood protection, capacity development on creating climate smart
business plans, etc.) or other relevant expenditures. The program will sharpen its focus on climate smart MSMEs with
strong potential for growth and productivity improvements by including related criteria (such as the inclusion of
Page 28 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
climate smart in business models) in its review process. The program will also enhance its efforts to target MSMEs
investing in digitization (digital tools, processes, and systems for business operations or participation on digital
platforms), environmentally and socially sustainable operations, with focus on resilience to disasters and other
economic shocks. Specific outreach will be made to target MSMEs led by women and youth, as well as those that are
exposed to climatic shocks. LEAP will refer MSMEs with a high potential to scale to the managers of the seed financing
facility financed under subcomponent 2.1, so those businesses can be considered for appropriate follow-on financing.
This window of the LEAP program is expected to utilize US$2 million of funding to finance around 200 MSMEs over
the project implementation period as listed in Table 2.
Table 2. LEAP Window 1: Estimated Financing for MSMEs by Firm Size
Firm Size Average Grant Size # of Total Grants Total Funding
Micro US$250 200 US$50,000
Small US$1000 75 US$75,000
Medium US$20,000 75 US$1,875,000
Total 350 US$2,000,000
Further details will be documented in the LEAP operational manual, including caps on the size of grants, matching
amounts required, eligibility criteria, proposal review procedures, and disbursement arrangements.
61. An additional LEAP window will be created to support skills development programs developed and delivered by public
or private training providers in partnership with the private sector. This responds to demand by firms in exporting
sectors for skills that are unmet in the market. These skills include technical, supervisory, climate risk and management
skills. For example, few textile firms promote Basotho to managerial or supervisory positions, citing a lack of skills. The
tourism and hospitality industry also cites lack of necessary skills in the market, and when severe climatic shocks (such
as the 2015/2016 el nino drought) occurred, their revenues declined. Other industries with potential for growth,
particularly within the digital economy, are limited by technical, managerial, and entrepreneurial skills. Such skills are
not being provided adequately through existing education options (TVET or university). This LEAP window will try to
create a demand-driven set of training programs by requiring the private sector to be involved in the development of
any programs it finances. Businesses and industry associations within high potential value chains that receive support
under subcomponent 2.3 will be encouraged to design skills programs that can be financed under this LEAP window.
Innovative delivery mechanisms using digital platforms or programming designed for women, youth, or other priority
groups will be encouraged. Similarly, innovative ways to attract the private sector to participate will be encouraged
such as the use of vouchers distributed through associations and businesses for employees or recruits receiving
training. Training programs will target improving environmental and climate sustainability, such as through improved
water usage and energy efficiency, as well as improving resilience to climate change through financial literacy training
on the role of savings and insurance in managing the financial impacts of shocks, and the use of credit to invest in
adaptation measures (e.g. flood defenses, terracing, storm drains, drought resistant seeds, etc.). This window of the
LEAP program is expected to utilize US$2.5 million of funding to finance around 10 skills development programs that
train 1,000 people over the project implementation period as listed in Table 3.
Table 3. LEAP Window 2: Estimated Financing for Skills Programs
# of Skills Programs Average Grant Provided # of Trainees Total Project Funding
Financed Disbursed
10 US$250,000 100 US$2,500,000
Page 29 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
Further details will be documented in the LEAP operational manual including eligible providers, program
requirements, co-financing, or other resources to be provided by the training providers, priority sectors or types of
trainees, etc. The skills window will be initiated after the LEAP matching grants program enhancements are completed
to simplify implementation.
62. Under PSCED2, administration of the LEAP program was financed by IDA with grant financing mostly provided by
government counterpart funds. One of the challenges with LEAP under PSCED2 was slow disbursement of funds that
were provided by the government. This discouraged applications to the program in comparison to the periods of time
when grants financing was provided by IDA and readily available to disburse. Under CAFI, IDA funds will therefore be
used for both program administration and grants financing. Program administration is expected to require US$0.5
million over the implementation period.
63. Finally, this sub-component will also support the expansion of the LEAP management and delivery capacity by bringing
in experienced private sector service providers to augment the delivery capacity of the PMU.
Sub-component 2.3. Expanding SME Participation in High Potential Value Chains (US$12 million)
64. This sub-component consists of technical assistance, training, and capacity building support for two activities that
target, respectively: (i) strengthening the competitiveness of the textile and apparel GVC and (ii) expanding
smallholder horticulture production through a Horticulture Incubation Program. The support for the textile and
apparel GVC is expected to accelerate the recovery of firms from the impacts of the pandemic, revitalize investments
in Lesotho taking advantage of new opportunities emerging from the global reorganization of GVCs and expand
business opportunities for (especially Basotho owned) SMEs through penetration of new markets, and enhancement
of firm level productivity and employment conditions. The Horticulture Incubation Program will aim to expand
participation of Basotho farmers in the commercial horticulture value chain, increasing the number of commercial
horticulture farms and expanding production for both domestic and export markets. This program will build on the
experience of the three demonstration farms that are currently being supported under the PSCED2 project.
65. Strengthening competitiveness of the textile and apparel GVC (US$6.0 million). This technical assistance program
will be designed and delivered by the International Labor Organization (ILO) in partnership with the International
Trade Center (ITC). The program will combine elements of the ILO’s Sustaining Competitive and Responsible
Enterprises (SCORE) program and the International Trade Center (ITC) Global Textile and Clothing (GTEX) program as
well as the Better Work program which was previously implemented in Lesotho. The program is expected to benefit
at least 50 textile and apparel firms and impact over 30,000 Basotho workers (80 percent of whom will be women).
The firm level productivity interventions will focus on continuous improvement projects in (i) improved workplace
collaboration; (ii) total quality management; (iii) resource efficiency and cleaner production; (iv) occupational safety
and health; and (v) better work force management including skills development for Basotho supervisory and middle
management staff. This will include a focus on improving conditions of work for workers themselves, particularly
women workers by ensuring transparent and accountable systems in place for maintaining the minimum working
conditions, informed by Lesotho’s international commitments on labor, with a focus on assessing compliance with the
ILO Maternity Protection Convention. The program will also develop the capacity of national business support
structures including the Association of Lesotho Employers and Businesses (ALEB), the LNDC, the Lesotho Textile
Exporters Association (LTEA), the Lesotho Garment Manufacturers Association (LGMA) and the MTI on improving
overall working conditions and promoting competitiveness. Close partnerships and coordination will be established
with the international garment buyers and retailers present in Lesotho through the ILO and ITC networks. The GTEX
Page 30 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
program will focus specifically on the Basotho-owned SMEs to improve pre-production capabilities to respond to an
increasing demand of international buyers to provide services beyond cut and trim (CMT) to Free on Board (FOB). The
technical support will include material sourcing, product development, and, to a certain extent, design development
capabilities. Corresponding areas of interventions could include increasing export marketing and branding capabilities
as well as facilitating market linkages into new potential markets including under the AfCFTA.
66. The expected intermediate outcomes of the support to the textile and apparel GVC would include reduced workforce
turnover and absenteeism, incidences of Gender Based Violence, product rework and defect rates, workplace
accidents and increased production line productivity and cost savings. The outcome indicators at the end of the
program will include increased employment, exports, and investments.
67. Expansion of smallholder horticulture production through a horticulture incubation program (US$6.0 million).
Building on the achievements of the current PSCED2 project support for horticulture production, support under this
program will finance goods, works, equipment, operating costs, technical assistance, and capacity building to expand
horticulture production for export using climate smart horticulture techniques. A competitively selected, experienced
service provider will be selected to design and deliver a climate smart horticulture incubation program to support new
and emerging commercial farms established by existing smallholder farmers and collectives. The service provider will
also be expected to manage and operate a Horticulture Incubator Center which will be established at a vacant facility
at Mahobong that is owned by the National University of Lesotho (NUL). The Horticulture Incubation program will
help support and develop competitive smallholder commercial horticulture farms and agribusiness SMEs and, while
doing so, develop new business models that are resilient to climatic shocks, can operate profitably and contribute to
job creation and farm livelihood diversification and shift the mindset of horticulture farmers to be climate smart.
Building on the experience gained from the three existing demonstration farms, the Horticulture Incubation program
will help select and adopt technologies appropriate for specific horticulture crops, identify and motivate emerging
farmers and entrepreneurs including farmers companies, and reduce entry barriers and strengthen linkages of these
farms and SMEs to regional value chains through facilitating access to markets, finance, networks, and technical
resources especially (but not exclusively) from South Africa. Selection criteria for the service provider will include
experience in climate smart horticulture (including stress tolerant horticulture, conservation agriculture, small-scale
irrigation and water harvesting, hail nets, flood protection, improved homestead gardening, and sustainable
processing technologies), recognizing that promoting climate smart horticulture will require a concerted effort to
sensitize and change the mindset of farmers.
68. The provisioning of physical space and resources at the Horticulture Incubator Center will include facilities in which
the clients can conduct operations, office space, meeting facilities, and certain required farming resources including
access to the existing demonstration farms. The selection of farmers/agribusiness SMEs into the incubation program
will be based on an open selection process and carefully established criteria including access to adequate land (soil
suitability and farming acreage), access to irrigation infrastructure (financed through the World Bank’s SADP2 project
or the Millennium Challenge Corporation compact), motivation and demonstrated commitment of the
farmers/entrepreneurs, availability of financial and other in-kind resources, the integration of climate risk
management and resilience into their farms and willingness to commit to at least a three-year incubation program.
Farmers/SMEs that benefit from the International Finance Corporation’s potential agribusiness investments in
Lesotho will be encouraged to apply. Several cohorts of farmers/agribusiness SMEs will be selected to participate in a
first phase pre-incubation program that provides training, office space and access to basic inputs such as
seeds/seedlings and other farm inputs. Farmers/SMEs that graduate from the pre-incubation program and meet
established criteria will be eligible to be part of a second phase full incubation program that provides more tailored
Page 31 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
training and technical support/extension services to scale their businesses, strengthen climate risk management and
access to commercial financing opportunities. It is expected that around 100 farmers/agribusiness SMEs will be
selected for the pre-incubation program of which between 10-15 farms/agribusiness SMEs are expected to qualify for
the full incubation program. The program will also support capacity and skills development for R&D and extension
services through a proposed partnership between Stellenbosch University and the NUL. The government has secured
US$0.95 million of parallel financing from the India, Brazil, South Africa fund to support the development of the
horticulture sector. This funding will be used to co-finance programs managed by the Horticulture Incubator Center.
Table 4. Summary of Component 2 Activities
Proposed budget
Component Activity
(US$)
Component 2 Scaling Support for Entrepreneurship and MSMEs 29.5 million
• Support to establish a sustainable Entrepreneurship Hub within the new Tourism 12.5 million
Information and Crafts Center building including:
o Upskilling and certification of entrepreneurship support organizations (ESOs)
o Competitive funding for ESO run incubation programs that incubate up to 500
Subcomponent 2.1.
innovative SMEs/startups
Establishing an
o Facilitation for the integration of the Lesotho Startup Community (LSC) within
Entrepreneurship Hub
a wider regional entrepreneurship ecosystem and build links to the Basotho
and Seed Financing
Diaspora
Facility
• Seed Financing Facility to provide funding for startups/innovative SMEs including
investments of US$50,000 for 50 startups with entry into an acceleration program
run by the fund management company; follow on investment for 5 startups that
demonstrate traction.
• Matching grants to MSMEs for productivity improvements or business expansion. 5 million
This is an evolution of the current Lesotho Enterprise Assistance Program (LEAP).
Subcomponent 2.2 • Grants for skills development programs developed jointly by the private sector and
Scaling the Lesotho public or private training providers. Programs would target for technical,
Enterprise Assistance supervisory and management skills in export sector or other high potential sectors
Program (LEAP) for including digital. Innovative delivery mechanisms such as digital platforms would be
MSMEs encouraged.
• Program administration costs including LEAP staff, consultancy contracts to
augment LEAP management, program evaluation, and related costs.
• For textile and apparel GVC, TA program will consist of a multi-year, integrated ILO
Sustaining Competitive and Responsible Enterprises (SCORE) program and the
International Trade Center (ITC) Global Textile and Clothing (GTEX) program,
Subcomponent 2.3
tailored for Basotho firms, and delivered jointly by both organizations.
Expanding SME
• Expansion of smallholder horticulture production through a Horticulture Incubation 12 million
Participation in High
program. Support under this program will finance goods, works, equipment,
Potential Value Chains
operating costs, technical assistance, and capacity building to setup a Horticulture
Incubator for small farms and agribusiness SMEs and expand horticulture
production for export.
Component 3. Project Management and Implementation Support (US$3.0 million IDA equivalent)
69. This component will provide support for the management and implementation of project-associated activities.
Activities to be financed include salaries of project management unit (PMU) staff/consultants in areas of project
management, project coordination, fiduciary specialists (e.g., procurement, financial management), monitoring and
Page 32 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
evaluation (M&E) specialist, a dedicated environment and social (E&S) specialist, project communication, and citizen
engagement. This component will also cover modest office equipment and independent audits and learning/training
for the PMU and beneficiary agencies, through the official closing date of the project. It is expected that all consultant
terms of reference (TORs) will clearly stipulate knowledge transfer and hands on training to ministry staff. Special
attention will be devoted to promoting equal participation of women in all decision-making bodies under the project
and contributing to tackling barriers in recruitment, retention, and promotion.
70. The project would also finance data collection on the SME and entrepreneurship sector to be carried out by the MTI
M&E unit, working with BEDCO, and with the support of the PMU. The data will be analyzed and shared with all
stakeholders in the project including the government beneficiary agencies (listed in section III.A), the
entrepreneurship hub and fund, the ESOs, and others. The purpose is to provide these stakeholders with data to
inform their program design decisions, which is largely missing in current program design.
71. This component will also support capacity building of the PMDU (Prime Minister’s Delivery Unit) under the Cabinet
Subcommittee on Trade and Investment), given the importance of the PMDU to delivering on the goals of the NSDP
II and the related objectives of this project. Two consultants, financed by the project, will act as core members of the
PMDU and provide capacity building to government staff employed at the PMDU. The support would be limited to
two years which is the timeframe the PMDU is expected to be active. One of the critical roles of the PMDU, as part of
its mandate from the Cabinet subcommittee on Trade and Investment, will be to track and monitor significant private
investments and address investment bottlenecks. This will enhance the effectiveness of the activities under
subcomponent 2.3 on value chain development. The PMDU will also ensure implementation progress on the G2B
systems supported under subcomponent 1.1, given their relevance to a stronger overall business environment which
is a high priority of the PMDU. This approach balances the benefits of strengthening and working with the PMDU
without creating reliance on the PMDU for the objectives of the project. A strengthened PMDU may be more likely to
continue through political changes.
72. The component will provide support for continuation of the public-private dialogue (PPD) platform initiated by the
PMDU. This PPD platform has provided an opportunity for the private sector to engage with the government during
the COVID-19 pandemic about impacts on SMEs, private firms, and industries. This has been well received by the
private sector and provided important inputs for government’s economic plans. The project would finance the costs
for a regular (e.g., monthly, or quarterly) series of engagements throughout the project duration. The private sector’s
views of the effectiveness of the PPD would be measured in the project’s results framework as part of the project’s
commitment to citizen engagement.
Page 33 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
Table 5. Summary Project Financing Table
Component Sub-Component IDA Financing GRiF
(US$ millions) Co-Financing
(US$ millions)
1.1 Enhancing G2B Digital Services to More Effectively Serve MSMEs 4.5 2.0
1. Enhancing Financial
Inclusion and Resilience 1.2 Improving Access to Financial Services 3.0
of MSMEs 1.3 Strengthening the Resilience of MSMEs to Climatic Disasters and
5.0 5.5
Shocks
2.1 Establishing an Entrepreneurship Hub and Seed Financing Facility 12.5
2. Scaling Support for
Entrepreneurship and
2.2 Scaling the Lesotho Enterprise Assistance Program (LEAP) for
5.0
MSMEs
MSMEs
2.3 Expanding SME Participation in High Potential Value Chains 12.0
3. Project Management and Implementation Support 3.0
TOTAL 45.0 7.5
Cross Cutting Considerations
73. Mobilizing Finance for Development (MFD) and Private Capital Mobilized (PCM). The project supports the MFD
approach in the following ways. Subcomponent 1.2 will support the PCG which will unlock private credit from banks
to participating MSMEs. Subcomponent 1.3 seeks to leverage the capital of international reinsurers and local insurers
through transferring sovereign risk of climatic shocks to the private market. (Box 1 explains how this is treated under
the Multilateral Development Bank Task Force Reference Guide 2018). Subcomponent 2.1 intends to attract private
investors in startups using the public funding in the seed investment facility. Targeting the public funding at the project
preparation phase offers potential to unlock significant private investment. Subcomponent 2.3 is designed to attract
new private investment in high-potential value chains that supports SME participation, through the targeted use of
public funding. Project preparation in a complex investment climate, such as that found in Lesotho, is a significant cost
hurdle for private investors with potential investment projects.
Page 34 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
Box 1 - Subcomponent 1.3 is expected to enable US$30 million of private capital
Subcomponent 1.3 will transfer sovereign climatic risk to the insurance market and mobilize the capital of private
(re)insurance companies (local and international) on the total sum insured, thereby reducing the financing that the
Government of Lesotho would have needed to allocate to address climatic shocks out of scarce budgetary resources.
The 2018 methodology considers insurance as PCM for situations whereby a multilateral development bank (MDB)
transfers its credit risk associated with loans or guarantees to an insurance company (unfunded risk transfer). With CAFI,
IDA is facilitating a risk transfer rather than transferring its own risk, and the total sum insured, estimated at US$30
million during the life of the project, is what insurers will be liable for should a severe climatic shock happen. The project
approach is well aligned with the thrusts of the Development Committee Paper “From Billions to Trillions”42) which states
“MDBs can provide new and expanded channels to address risk and uncertainty, and thus mobilize resources and co-
investment from both existing and nontraditional sources of capital such as pension funds, sovereign wealth funds, and
insurance companies”. The paper recognizes “weather insurance for farmers” as a development finance solution.
According to the 2018 methodology, there are three conditions to qualify as PCM under the unfunded risk transfer:
1. The risk transfer is in respect of the specific set of assets which the MDB is financing from its commitments: The
project is providing contingent financing for MSMEs since the sovereign insurance will enable the MOF to provide
relief resources to shock affected but otherwise viable MSMEs to enable them to keep their businesses open during
severe shocks.
2. The timing of the commitment of the third-party insurer and the MDB’s financing commitment are within twelve
months of each other. The task team will strive to work with the Government to design and place an initial insurance
product within the first 12 months of the project.
3. The MDB reduces its reported commitments by the same amount as the coverage of the risk transfer. This Project
does not meet this criterion. The Project is using the most efficient route to transfer risk and mobilize private finance
from insurers, thus complying with the spirit of this condition. If IDA were to strictly follow the letter of this condition,
IDA would need to i) issue a CAT DDO type of instrument as contingent funding in case of drought and then ii) sell the
instrument or a portion of it to an insurer. Since IDA credit interest rates are very low in line with its development
mandate, IDA would have to sell the instrument at a loss to pass it to a market counterpart. Furthermore, the dialog
with the Government of Lesotho on a CAT DDO has been tabled for now after the occurrence of Covid-19. Therefore,
the approach taken by the project to support the Government of Lesotho purchase sovereign insurance using IDA
resources is a significantly more efficient way to transfer this risk to the private insurance market.
As shown above, the Project does not meet all three criteria under the MDB PCM methodology, but it is fully aligned with
the spirit of the methodology. It will therefore track the capital at risk from insurance companies as Private Capital
Enabled (PCE).
C. Project Beneficiaries
74. The project’s direct beneficiaries include 20,000 MSMEs under component 1 and 600 MSMEs and 600 workers under
component 2. This includes:
• Entrepreneurs and SMEs that receive financing and business support services, including particularly women-
owned and youth-owned businesses.
42 From billions to trillions: MDB contributions to financing for development (English). Washington, D.C. World Bank Group.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/602761467999349576/From-billions-to-trillions-MDB-contributions-to-financing-for-
development
Page 35 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
• Entrepreneurship hubs that receive capacity building support.
• Farmers and agribusiness SMEs that are integrated into the horticulture value chain.
• People that are provided skills that make them more employable or more valuable to existing employers
through skills development programs.
Table 6: Component 1 and 2 Beneficiaries
Resilience Seed LEAP LEAP LEAP Value chain Value chain
Payments Financing (Micro (Small (Medium (Textile (Horticulture
(MSMEs) (Startups) businesses) businesses) businesses) Workers) SMEs/Farms)
Number of
beneficiaries 20,000 50 200 75 75 600 200
D. Results Chain
75. Figure 10 shows the theory of change developed for the project. Outputs are what is expected to be produced directly
because of project activities. These outputs contribute to the medium-term outcomes that are tied closely to the PDO.
These in turn contribute to the long-term outcomes which are defined in the CPF and planned to be achieved in a 10-
to-15-year timeframe.
76. Key challenges addressed by Component 1 include inefficiencies in the G2B systems that support business activity,
poor financial infrastructure that limits access to finance for MSMEs, and repeated climatic and other shocks that
negatively impact the business activity of MSMEs. Component 1 activities that address these challenges will lead to
improvements in G2B systems, increased financial services for MSMEs, and instruments to provide resilience to shocks
for MSMEs. This contributes to business creation and expansion, increased financing for businesses, and more
productive MSMEs resilient to shocks. Key challenges addressed by Component 2 include a nascent entrepreneurship
ecosystem, limited capabilities of MSMEs to grow and engage in digital business, and limited presence of local SMEs
in Lesotho’s high potential value chains. Component 2 activities that address these challenges will lead to the
establishment of an entrepreneurship hub and seed fund that support startups with financing and business advice,
MSMEs more capable to conduct digital business, and SMEs operating within high potential value chains. This
contributes to startup creation and growth particularly for women and youth owned startups, MSMEs with increasing
revenues including through increased digital business, and MSMEs growing through links to high potential value
chains. Key challenges addressed by Component 3 include government bottlenecks and data gaps that create
inefficiencies in delivering G2B services to the private sector. Component 3 activities that address these challenges
will lead to more efficient G2B services supported by the project, a PMDU that leads private sector reforms and
engagement between the public and private sectors, and improved data to inform design and delivery of private sector
support programs. This contributes to sustainability of efficient G2B services and SME and entrepreneurship programs
that better reflect the needs of the private sector. In the long term, these results contribute to more dynamic and
diverse economy, more and better job creation, and an inclusive and resilient private sector.
Page 36 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
Figure 10: Project Theory of Change
E. Rationale for Bank Involvement and Role of Partners
77. The World Bank brings substantial value added in supporting this project, based on its experience with previous
private sector projects in Lesotho and its global expertise in financial inclusion and private sector development. This
project builds on the lessons learned and progress made by two previous World Bank private sector competitiveness
projects in Lesotho – the PSCED and PSCED2 projects. The new CAFI project will draw on lessons from and synergies
with financial sector development, disaster risk financing, entrepreneurship and MSMEs and value chains. The World
Bank has implemented projects on these topics in several African countries and small or landlocked countries that
bring useful experience. For example, building an entrepreneurship ecosystem within a small market requires specific
approaches, for which the World Bank can draw on prior experiences. Similarly, the World Bank can draw on disaster
risk financing approaches from similar small market countries. The World Bank’s analytical services to the government
on financial inclusion and private sector development will also inform the proposed project. The World Bank will
prepare diagnostic, operational, and evaluative research during project implementation that will further influence
how the project can utilize the financial sector and private sector to create jobs and support growth.
78. The proposed project complements existing development partner support. Other institutions, including the
Millennium Challenge Corporation, United Nations Development Program (UNDP), African Development Bank (AFDB),
International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD), US Trade and Investment Hub, and the European Union,
among others, are working to support financial inclusion and private sector development. Some programs were
recently completed, such as the UNDP’s Scaling Inclusion through Mobile Money in 2019 and Enhancing Youth
Empowerment for Sustainable Development Project in 2020; others are ongoing, including the African Development
Bank’s Economic Diversification Support Project, ILO’s Better Work program and IFAD’s Wool and Mohair Promotion
Page 37 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
Project; and others are currently undergoing preparation, such as the Millennium Challenge Corporation’s Business
Environment and Technical Assistance (BETA) project and Market-Driven Irrigated Horticulture Project.
Implementation of the project will be done in coordination with these complementary programs and engagement
with the World Bank’s development partners to maximize synergies and strengthen outcomes of shared objectives.
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design
79. The design of the project is informed by World Bank experience supporting private sector development and
analytical work on high-growth firms, entrepreneurship, and SMEs. These include the following:
• The project design incorporates lessons learned from similar World Bank-funded projects on access to finance and
entrepreneurship, such as the Ghana Economic Transformation Project (P166539), the Benin Vocational Education
and Entrepreneurship for Jobs Project (P175768), the Kenya Industry and Entrepreneurship Project (P161317), the
Palestine Innovative Private Sector Development (P164412), the Morocco Innovative Startups and SMEs Project
(P127482), the Jordan Innovative Startups Fund Project (P161905), and the Egypt Catalyzing Entrepreneurship for
Job Creation (P162835) project, as well as projects on entrepreneurship supported by the World Bank's infoDev
global partnership program.
• Analytical work includes the High-Growth Firms report43 and the COVID-19 Response for Firms Note44, as well as
country specific reports including Unlocking Lesotho's Private Sector (2018)45 and the Lesotho Digital Economy
Diagnostic (2020).46
Some of these lessons learned are summarized below:
• Support for growth-oriented startups and SMEs should be provided by private sector minded providers even when
funding comes from public resources. These intermediaries are generally either privately-owned or publicly
owned but privately managed.
• Publicly funded entrepreneurship programs should ensure that strong talent and high-performance culture is
developed within ecosystem intermediaries. Unlocking funding based on successful performance can incentivize
intermediaries to develop and implement high-quality programs.
• Financing alone is insufficient to boost the growth of startups and firms, and a comprehensive package of financial
and nonfinancial services-including mentoring, training, business advisory services, and networking-is necessary
to sustain the growth.
• Digital platforms can offer an opportunity for MSMEs that have not been online to reach new and wider markets.
• Regulatory and institutional reforms to the business environment are important complements to firm-level
interventions to achieve results beyond the direct beneficiaries.
80. The design of the proposed project draws upon lessons and experience from previous and ongoing World Bank-
supported projects and analytical work in Lesotho, including:
43 World Bank. 2019. High-Growth Firms: Facts, Fiction, and Policy Options for Emerging Economies. Washington, DC: World Bank.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/30800
44 World Bank. October 14, 2020. World Bank COVID-19 Response. https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/factsheet/2020/10/14/world-
bank-covid-19-response
45 World Bank. 2018. Unlocking the potential of Lesotho’s private sector: a focus on apparel, horticulture, and ICT (English).
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/832751537465818570/Unlocking-the-potential-of-Lesotho-s-private-sector-a-focus-on-
apparel-horticulture-and-ICT
46 World Bank. 2020. Lesotho Digital Economy Diagnostic. World Bank, Washington, DC.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/33881
Page 38 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
• Embed SCD interventions in the project: The 2015 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) emphasized the need to
shift from a public sector-driven to a private sector-driven, export-oriented, and job-creating economic growth
model. One of the three identified pathways to the WBG’s twin goals was promoting a competitive and export-
oriented private sector by establishing incentives to support an outward-looking orientation. In 2021, the World
Bank Group published an updated SCD entitled “Bridging Implementation Gaps to Accelerate Development, which
noted that progress on this pathway was slow and that the private sector remained weak and small. It further
noted that the overall doing business environment deteriorated; exports lacked diversification and concentrated
on very few sectors; just over half of all businesses were excluded from the financial sector; labor productivity had
declined over time, and few jobs had been created. To address these challenges, the new SCD suggests the
following interventions, which have all been embedded into this project: (i) accelerating implementation of
business reforms; (ii) establishing a modern, competitive investment policy and legal regime; (iii) accelerating the
implementation of key legal and regulatory financial sector reforms, together with the rollout of digital financial
services to expand inclusion; (iv) increasing agricultural productivity, value addition and commercialization to
promote agribusiness development, MSMEs and food security; (v) building on past success to revitalize the
manufacturing sector and ensuring the sector regains its competitiveness; (vi) attracting private investments in
key value chains to create new jobs; and (vii) improving trade facilitation and trade policy.
• Accompany TA on business environment reforms. The PSCED and PSCED2 projects suggest that while legal and
regulatory reforms are important, within the political economy context of Lesotho, these are likely to be more
efficient and effectively delivered through accompany ASA rather than through the operation. The project has
therefore minimized the number of legal and regulatory reforms in the project and removed any project activities
that rely on such reforms.
• Focus on growth-oriented SMEs. The WBG Operational Guidance document on strengthening World Bank SME
support interventions was published in 2020. It emphasizes that supporting survival MSMEs may counter the
overall jobs and economic transformation agenda. Low productivity SMEs can be an obstacle to growth for high-
potential businesses, promote inefficient allocation of limited resources, and impede sustainable creation of more
and better jobs. Thus, supporting high-potential SMEs that have the scope to create jobs is critical to supporting
the overarching goal of reducing unemployment.
• Capacity building is critical for implementation. The original PDO for the PSCED2 was to “contribute to the
development of selected non-textile sectors resulting in increased private sector investment, firm growth and job
creation.” During the restructuring in March 2017, it was proposed to revise the PDO to “to improve the business
environment for firms, strengthen select government institutions, and further diversify the economy.” The revised
PDO focused on strengthening the capacity of select government institutions, in parallel to other activities.
Learning from this, a core part of the CAFI project is providing technical assistance and capacity building to
government departments, to mitigate implementation challenges and strengthen outcomes.
• Interoperability of existing systems is key to increasing utilization. Under the previous project, complexities
arose from having multiple business systems, poorly streamlined processes, and limited investments in public
access sites. The PSCED2 restructuring report highlights the importance of streamlining business processes. To
address this, the CAFI project seeks to build interoperability between systems, including the construction
permitting system, the electronic payments system at the OBFC, the collateral registry, and the credit bureau.
Page 39 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
III. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
81. The project will be implemented by the same Project Management Unit (PMU) that is currently implementing the
PSCED2 project under MTI. The PSCED2 PMU has a strong performance track record of over 15 years and has
established strong project implementation capacity as well as working relationships with key agencies and Ministries
across the Government. The PSCED2 project will conclude on June 30, 2022, allowing the PMU to be available and
ready for CAFI project implementation from the outset of the project. The PMU will be responsible for all fiduciary
aspects of the project including FM and procurement activities.
82. The PMU will also act as a capacity building partner for the PMDU. This brings some additional responsibility for the
PMU but also provides the PMU with access to the highest levels of government if implementation challenges arise.
This should be beneficial to successful implementation of the project. The PMU also currently acts as the implementing
agency for the AfDB’s private sector development project. This has facilitated strong coordination between the Bank
and AfDB’s complementary projects and that coordination can be expected to continue under the new project while
the AfDB project is reaching closure.
83. The PMU has established strong working relationships through the current project with the relevant Ministries and
agencies which is expected to continue through this project and the PMU will continue to provide capacity building
support to the agencies as needed. The project will endeavor to transfer implementation responsibilities to the
beneficiary agencies to the extent possible to build sustainability. The key project beneficiary entities are listed below.
Table 7. Beneficiary Agencies
Sub-Component Beneficiary Agencies
1.1 Enhancing G2B Digital Services to More Effectively Serve MSMEs OBFC, DTT, MPWT
1.2 Improving Access to Financial Services MOF, LRA, CBL
1.3 Improving the Resilience of the Private Sector to Climatic Disasters and Shocks MTI, MOF, LRA, CBL
2.1 Establishing a Digital Entrepreneurship Hub and Seed Financing Facility MSBD, BEDCO
2.2 Scaling Up the LEAP Program for MSMEs MSBD, BEDCO
2.3 Expanding SME Participation in High Potential Value Chains LNDC, Labor Commissioner, NUL
3. Project Management and Implementation Support MTI, PMDU
DTT = Department of Traffic and Transport
MPWT = Ministry of Public Works and Transport
84. An overview of implementation arrangements for each subcomponent is included below. Full implementation details
are provided in Annex 1.
85. Subcomponent 1.1: The activities under this subcomponent will be procured by the PMU, on behalf of the beneficiary
agencies, with supervision jointly managed by the PMU and beneficiary agencies. Transition of the business
registration system into the UNCTAD business licensing and business permitting system will be carried out by
UNCTAD’s implementation team, working with the OBFC, which hosts these systems. The PMU will launch a
competitive procurement for an international consulting firm to develop the G2B interoperability framework.
Page 40 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
86. Subcomponent 1.2: The main beneficiary agency for the credit infrastructure activity is the CBL, under which the credit
reporting system and the movable asset registry are housed. The MOF, MTI, and MOHA are critical for the
advancement of envisaged work under this subcomponent, particularly given the system integration and inter-
ministerial coordination required to strengthen the credit infrastructure system. The CBL will work jointly with the
PMU to identify and supervise the contractors that will work with beneficiary agencies on the various activities
including diagnostics, assessments, and piloting of approaches and systems. The new product development activity
leverages advancements made on the movable asset registry in the development of value chain financing, for which
Post Bank will be the primary implementing partner.
87. Under the risk sharing facility (PCG) activity, the MOF, MTI, and LNDC are the three critical agencies required to
advance envisaged work. LNDC is the key implementing partner and will be responsible for the development and
implementation of the portfolio guarantee. A technical working group will be constituted with representatives from
the two ministries, as well technical staff from LNDC, to provide input and make key decisions with respect to this
activity.
88. Subcomponent 1.3: A DRF coordinator will be hired into the PMU to manage the implementation of the MSME
resilience subcomponent. The DRF coordinator will be financed using GRiF resources. Their primary reporting line will
be to the Project Manager/PMU. They will also have a dashed reporting line to MTI and the Budget Controller of the
MOF, given the parallel capacity building that will be done through the ASA. The establishment of an inter-agency
DRF technical committee - including for example officials from the MOF, MSBD, MTI and Disaster Management
Authority. The committee will validate the disbursement report. The report will then be sent to the head of the PMU
for approval and release of funds the MSME resilience account to affected MSMEs.
89. Subcomponent 2.1. The PMU will hire experts to support them to run a fair and transparent international selection
of two partners. The first is an operating agency to run the Entrepreneurship Hub and the ecosystem development
activities and the second is a fund management partner that will run the seed financing facility and associated
acceleration program. Once the Entrepreneurship Hub operating agency has been selected the PMU will have two
roles: (i) monitoring and supervising the operating agency and (ii) disbursing the grants to the ESOs and the
startups/innovative SMEs incubated under the ESO programs.
90. Subcomponent 2.2. The LEAP program is currently managed by a small (3 person) team within the PSCED2 PMU. The
placement of the LEAP management at the PMU is designed to ensure that selection of supported MSMEs is objective
and merit-based and allows for close implementation support by the World Bank. This arrangement will continue
under the CAFI project at least for the initial years of implementation. Over time, consideration will be given to
migrating the LEAP management to another organization. This could be an international consulting company, a
mission-aligned organization such as the entrepreneurship hub or seed financing fund manager, or a public agency
such as BEDCO or LNDC. Such a migration might support sustainability beyond the project implementation period but
might also reduce the oversight by the World Bank and PMU. As such, the migration will be considered only after the
LEAP program has established a track record of strong implementation under the CAFI project.
91. The current 3-person LEAP management team will be expanded by 1-2 additional staff given the additional window
and greater program funding being added under CAFI. Specifically, 1-2 additional grants officer(s) will be hired. Regular
monitoring and evaluation (M&E), financial management, and procurement for the LEAP program will continue to be
carried out by the PMU staff assigned these roles. Supplemental M&E activities will be carried out by consultants hired
Page 41 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
by the LEAP team as necessary. To foster continual improvements in the LEAP program, the project will support a mid-
term evaluation of the impacts of LEAP grants under both windows, carried out by an independent M&E contractor.
92. Subcomponent 2.3: The support to the textile and apparel sector will be designed and delivered by a joint ILO-ITC
team of technical experts and consultants (drawing upon their experience in other countries such as Egypt, Tunisia,
and Madagascar as well as the global Better Work program) and will be managed by a competitively selected Chief
Technical Officer. The Chief Technical Officer and nationally recruited project officers will report to the Project
Coordinator and the program will be implemented under the oversight of a Technical Steering Committee chaired by
the Principal Secretary of MTI and which includes the LNDC, Labor Commissioner, LTEA, LGMA and ALEB. The
government will enter into a Cooperation Agreement with the ILO/ITC that includes the scope of work, deliverables,
outputs and outcomes, monitoring, evaluation, and reporting as well as financial arrangements (based on similar
agreements with other UN agencies in the past) and acceptable to the World Bank.
93. The horticulture incubation program will be implemented by a competitively selected private service provider who
will also manage and operate the horticulture incubator center at Mahobong. The program will be managed by a
project lead who will report to the project coordinator. The National University of Lesotho will enter into a lease
agreement with MTI for the facility which will be upgraded into a functioning incubator center and managed by the
service provider. The procurement for the upgrading of the facility will be managed by the PMU with input from the
service provider. The capacity building and skills development program will be delivered through an agreement
between Stellenbosch University and the National University of Lesotho.
94. Sequencing of Implementation. Implementation of activities will be sequenced as (i) some activities are dependent
on other activities that will begin at the outset of implementation, and (ii) sequencing will allow the PMU to
concentrate on key activities at the outset of implementation. Table 8 below describes the planned sequencing of the
project activities.
Table 8. Sequencing of Implementation
Subcomponent Implementation Beginning Immediately Implementation Beginning Later (Various
Starting Points)
• OBFC’s business registration and licensing • G2B systems upgrades (follows
1.1 Enhancing G2B Digital upgrade and consolidation into UNCTAD’s completion of the interoperability
Services to More Effectively platform. framework)
Serve MSMEs • G2B interoperability framework
• Government payment gateway
• Credit infrastructure system strengthening • Market innovation through the
1.2 Improving Access to • LNDC risk sharing facility TA program development of new financial products
Financial Services (asset-backed lending and agriculture
value chain financing)
• National Disaster Risk Finance Policy TA • Provide US$4 million for MSME
1.3 Strengthening the • Work with the national business registry to financial resilience fund (follows the
Resilience of MSMEs to establish a database for informal MSMEs DRF Policy development)
Climatic Disasters and eligible for financial support during climatic • Technical assistance on the design and
Shocks shocks procurement of a sovereign insurance
backstop
Page 42 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
Subcomponent Implementation Beginning Immediately Implementation Beginning Later (Various
Starting Points)
2.1 Establishing an • Entrepreneurship Hub and programs (ESO • Seed Financing Facility (follows pipeline
Entrepreneurship Hub and strengthening, incubation programs, development by the Hub programs)
Seed Financing Facility ecosystem building)
2.2 Scaling the Lesotho • LEAP MSME Matching grants program • LEAP Industry-Driven Skills Program
Enterprise Assistance revisions and funding Window
Program (LEAP) for MSMEs
• First phase of training for around 100 • Second phase of in-depth business
farmers/MSMEs under the horticulture incubation support for a selected
2.3 Expanding SME incubation program cohort of farms and establishment of
Participation in High • Design of the textile and apparel GVC TA the Horticulture Incubation Center
Potential Value Chains program and training/ capacity building of • Implementation of the audits, training,
stakeholders and selection of participating and capacity building programs
firms
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements
95. The project will design, implement, and institutionalize a robust monitoring and evaluation system to collect timely
data, analyze progress and results, and utilize the findings to make programmatic decisions and course-corrections.
Monitoring of the project’s results indicators will be carried out by the M&E unit of MTI with support from the PMU,
utilizing information from the project’s beneficiary agencies. The MTI M&E team and PMU will work with these
agencies to develop streamlined information flow mechanisms from different stakeholders (such as the ESOs
supported by the Entrepreneurship Hub, the LEAP program managers, the horticulture incubation program, etc.). The
MTI M&E team and PMU will develop and maintain a system to aggregate data across the programs to generate both
the internal key performance indicators and results framework indicators. To ensure effective implementation and
M&E management, several actions will be needed to strengthen the Government’s capacity to ensure reliable and
high-quality M&E. First, the project will support PMU efforts to enhance its current information system so that it can
gather data on performance of institutions including tracer studies, ESO providers’ assessment, surveys of the
beneficiaries. It will also support TA to the implementing agencies to design the M&E system for the project and to
develop operational monitoring systems at the program level. Project implementation will be monitored regularly
through bi-annual supervision missions. Process evaluations will be conducted every year to detect bottlenecks and
identify good practices and inform possible adaptation. Lessons learned from relevant assessments will be used for
course correction during project implementation.
96. Evaluation of project activities. The project will explore and use various evaluative approaches to assess the project’s
relevance, effectiveness, impact, efficiency, and sustainability. The project will conduct baseline, midline and end line
evaluations to track progress by triangulating both quantitative data and qualitative information. This will be further
complemented by the monitoring data collected regularly by the MTI M&E team and PMU. The project will also
identify opportunities to conduct impact evaluations in partnership with the Gender Innovation Lab, particularly to
understand how project interventions contribute to the gender-sensitive outcomes. Similarly, the project will also
explore the use of formative evaluations of key project activities (such as the entrepreneurship training programs,
LEAP, access to finance, and upgrading G2B systems) to identify strengths, weaknesses, and opportunities to
Page 43 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
strengthen interventions, improve targeting and coverage, and enhance implementation strategies. Tracer studies,
ESO providers’ assessment, and surveys of the beneficiaries will also be conducted to inform the effectiveness and
efficiency of project activities.
C. Sustainability
97. The project is supporting broad reforms on financial inclusion and the private sector. Such efforts are meant to
strengthen access to finance, create jobs and support export-led growth. Sustainability will be supported through
three main avenues: system level interventions, infrastructure development, and skills development/capacity
building.
• System-level interventions will promote structural reform. System-level interventions include investments to
enhance the interoperability of government IT systems that facilitate private sector activity; implementation of a
government payment gateway to support G2B digital payments; investments to strengthen credit infrastructure;
establishment of an MSME resilience account for rapid disbursements and procurement of sovereign insurance
(which will be co-financed on a sliding basis, so the cost is increasingly transferred to the budget over the life of
the project).
• Establishment of infrastructure: The project will support the establishment of a sustainable entrepreneurship
hub, seed financing facility, infrastructure for the horticulture incubator program. This infrastructure will exceed
the life of the project, enabling activities to continue.
• Technical assistance will build skills amongst the workforce and government capacity. Technical assistance will
be provided to the Government to address deficiencies and build interoperability and strengthen disaster risk
financing. For the workforce, skills development initiatives will build technical, supervisory and management
capacity in high potential sectors and capacity of MSMEs and entrepreneurs. Building capacity at the government
level will enable line ministries and agencies to continue project activities after the completion of the project.
Skills development is intended to equip the workforce with the skills required at the labor market, thereby
enabling them to find employment.
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY
A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis
98. The project is expected to offer a range of social and economic benefits to support the creation and growth of firms
in Lesotho, along with overall growth of the economy, by addressing key constraints and bottlenecks for local
businesses. The project is also expected to support efficiency and productivity improvements within government
agencies and offices that serve MSMEs through digital capacity building, along with improving access to finance and
resiliency support available to these firms. Additionally, the project will provide support to establish a sustainable
Entrepreneurship Hub and a Seed Financing Facility, provide matching grants to enable productivity improvements
and skills development programs, and targeted support to SMEs in high-potential value chains. These interventions
will help improve the competitiveness of local businesses, thus increasing profits, contributing to increased fiscal
revenues, and supporting the growth of high-potential sectors and exports. This support to businesses will additionally
help to contribute to the creation of more and better jobs.
99. As part of preparation for the project, the World Bank task team conducted an economic and financial analysis (EFA)
to determine the value of the anticipated benefits relative to the costs associated with the project. The total project
Page 44 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
Net Present Value (NPV) is estimated at US$11.1 million at a 15 percent discount rate,47 and the Economic Rate of
Return (ERR) at 24 percent based on the total project investments. The economic analysis of this project is based on
increased revenues for SME beneficiaries under Components 1 and 2 through the activities and investments under
this project.
100. Component 1: Since subcomponents 1.1 and 1.2 focus on technical assistance to improve government services for
MSMEs, these activities have been excluded from the analysis as their impact is difficult to quantify; however, Annex
2 includes a discussion on the literature supporting such investments. For subcomponent 1.3, the NPV is estimated
at US$856 thousand using a 15 percent discount rate, with an ERR of 18 percent, based on a 44 percent reduction
in MSME revenues estimated as a result of climate shocks.
101. Component 2: The Component 2 NPV is estimated at US$10.3 million using a 15 percent discount rate, with an ERR
of 26 percent. Beneficiaries are expected to show a lower failure rate and higher revenue growth rates due to the
investments of the Project.
B. Fiduciary
(i) Financial Management
102. The PMU within the MTI will be accountable for the project financial management arrangements, (including
budgeting, accounting, payments, internal controls, transaction processing, quarterly and annual financial
reporting). This responsibility will be entrusted on the Financial Manager of the PMU. The project will use the
existing accounting system, called TOMPRO to record and account on the project funds.
103. Budgets will be prepared based on approved work plans and procurements plans. In accordance with the World
Bank’s financial reporting requirements, the project will be required to prepare and submit to the World Bank
Unaudited Interim Financial Reports not later than 45 days after the end of each financial quarter.
104. Disbursements under the project will be done in accordance with the rules and procedures as set out in the World
Bank’s disbursement handbook. Component 1.1 and 1.3 of the project will be financed through IDA and TF funds,
but financing the same activity. To this end a pooled Designated Account will be maintained by the project. The
Designated Account will be opened with the Central Bank of Lesotho. The FM systems for the PMU are assessed as
adequate for the project to use IFRs for disbursement and financial reporting. Advance in the Designated Account
will be based on expenditure projections for six months and will be supported by the forecast prepared as part of
the IFRs.
105. The annual project financial statements, including the auditor’s opinion and a management letter, will be submitted
to the Bank not later than six months after the end of the fiscal year. The annual audit will be carried out by the
Office of the Auditor General of Lesotho.
106. The overall conclusion of the financial management assessment is that the project’s financial management has an
overall risk-rating of Moderate. The ongoing FM arrangements are working adequately. The project is not financing
47 The EFA model utilized a 15 percent discount rate as the estimated risk-adjusted opportunity cost of capital. Additional NPV estimates
at other discount rates have also been provided as a measure of the sensitivity of our analysis.
Page 45 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
complex activities; it will finance consultancies, small works, PMU, and grant management that the PMU has been
satisfactory performing with the previous project.
107. The Recipient will carry out procurement for the project in accordance with the World Bank’s “Procurement
Regulations for IPF Borrowers” (Procurement Regulations) dated July 2016 and revised in November 2017, in August
2018 and November 2020 under the “New Procurement Framework (NPF), and the “Guidelines on Preventing and
Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants”, dated July 1, 2016,
and other provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreements.
108. Procurement activities shall be carried out by the PMU on behalf of the beneficiary agencies. All procuring entities
as well as bidders and service providers, i.e., suppliers, contractors and consultants shall observe the highest
standard of ethics during the procurement and execution of contracts financed under the project in accordance with
paragraph 3.32 and Annex IV of the Procurement Regulations.
(ii) Procurement
109. General Procurement arrangement: The CAFI project is an Investment Project Financing (IPF) and procurement for
the proposed project will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank’s Procurement Regulations for
Investment Project Financing Recipients - Procurement in Investment Project Financing Goods, Works, Non-
Consulting and Consulting Services, Fourth Edition, November 2020. The Project will also be subject to the
Guidelines on Preventing and Combatting Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits
and Grants’ dated July 1, 2016. The procurement planning, execution and contract management processes will be
tracked through the Systematic Tracking of Exchange in Procurement (STEP) System.
110. Government National Procurement System: The Lesotho Procurement Regulations of 2007, revised in 2018 have
been assessed and the results indicate that the Country’s Regulations are generally consistent with international
good practices, although some weaknesses were identified, which should be mitigated through adequate measures
to insure and enhance: (a) there is adequate advertising in national media; (b) procurement is generally open to
eligible firms from any country; (c) contract documents have an appropriate allocation of responsibilities, risks, and
liabilities; (d) publication of contract award; (e) the national regulations do not preclude the World Bank from its
rights to review and audit procurement documentation and activities under the financing; (f) implementation of an
effective complaints review mechanism; (g) maintenance of records of the procurement process and (h) the request
for bids/request for proposals document shall require that bidders/proposers submitting bids/proposals present a
signed acceptance at the time of bidding, to be incorporated in any resulting contracts, confirming application of,
and compliance with, the World Bank’s Anti-Corruption Guidelines, including without limitation, the World Bank’s
right to sanction and the World Bank’s inspection and audit rights. With incorporation of these qualifications/
provisions, the Lesotho Procurement Regulations will be acceptable to be used under those procurements using
open national approach not subject to the World Bank’s Prior Review as to be agreed with the World Bank in the
Procurement Plan to be approved in STEP.
111. Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD): MTI developed a Project Procurement Strategy for
Development (PPSD) that informs (i) determination of optimal procurement approaches and (ii) the development
of the fit for purpose Procurement Plan for the first 18 months of project implementation. The PPSD includes
identification of major contracts under the project, detailed market information, procurement approach options,
and procurement risks analysis for the packages envisaged under the project. The PPSD and the Procurement Plan
Page 46 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
maybe be updated during project implementation to reflect any substantial changes in procurement approaches
and methods to meet the actual project needs.
112. Procurement Risk Assessment: The procurement risk assessment has taken into considerations the Strengths,
Weaknesses, Opportunities and Treats of the operational context of the implementing agency. The project will be
implemented by the same PMU that is currently implementing the World Bank financed PSCED2 project under MTI.
The PSCED2 PMU has good performance track record of many years and has established project implementation
capacity as well as working relationships with key agencies and Ministries across the Government. The PSCED2
project will end in June 2022 allowing the PMU to be available and ready for CAFI project implementation from the
outset of the project. The PMU will be responsible for all fiduciary aspects of the project including FM and
procurement activities. The MTI and its PMU, having prior experience of working on PSCED and PSCED2 projects,
are expected to implement the project smoothly. However, the fact that there will be many project beneficiaries
under each component and subcomponent may make coordination a challenge and could be considered as a risk.
Based on the existing procurement capacity under the MTI, the overall organizational structure for implementing
the project, and the interaction between the project’s staff responsible for procurement duties and management
of the Ministry, risk is assessed as Moderate. This rating has also considered the fact that the current project
(PSCED2) does not have any IPF component involving complex or high value contracts. It is also expected that all the
procurement activities envisaged under the new project (CAFI) will be simple and small value contracts. Taking all
these circumstances, though this section will be further refined after detailed procurement capacity assessment of
MTI is conducted, the major capacity limitations or risks identified at the moment are: (i) coordination challenge as
implementation of components and subcomponents involve many beneficiaries, (ii) Implementation capacity gap
within the different beneficiaries, and (iii) lack of practices on good contracts implementation management.
113. Procurement Risk Mitigation measures: The MTI will have overall responsibility of procurement under the project.
Based on the above preliminary procurement implementation risk identification, the mitigation measures may
include: (i) provision of reorientation/training to the PMU on World Bank’s procurement procedures and contract
management, including use of STEP platform; (ii) putting in place simple, but efficient, procurement and contract
management mechanism (tracking system);(iii) Develop PIM/PPSD that would assist the practitioners on
procurement routines and (iv) strengthen the PMU based on the need of the new project. More frequent World
Bank’s implementation support missions with the objectives of providing closer support and monitoring the
performance of PMU and its Procurement team’s performance would add value.
114. Operating costs. These items will be procured using the borrower’s national procurement and administrative
procedures acceptable to the World Bank, including selection and payment to project implementation support
personnel. Operating costs may include project related communications and travel costs, conference costs,
maintenance costs, repair costs, honorariums, and similar operating costs that may be reimbursed through SoEs.
115. Fiduciary oversight by the World Bank. The World Bank shall prior review contracts according to the prior review
thresholds set in the PPSD/Procurement Plan. All contracts not covered under prior review by the World Bank will
be subject to post review during implementation support missions, including missions by consultants hired by the
World Bank or through supreme audit institutions as part of the financial audit. The World Bank may, at any time,
conduct independent procurement reviews of all the contracts financed under the credit.
116. Record keeping: All records pertaining to award of tenders, including bid notification, register pertaining to sale and
receipt of bids, bid opening minutes, bid evaluation reports and all correspondence pertaining to bid evaluation,
Page 47 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
communication sent to/with the World Bank in the process, bid securities, and approval of invitation/evaluation of
bids by the management would be retained by the Procurement Unit and also uploaded in the STEP for Post ante
review and Independent procurement audit, as necessary.
.C . Legal Operational Policies
.
Triggered?
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No
Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No
.
D. Environmental and Social
117. The overall environmental and social risk rating for the project is Moderate. The social risk rating is Moderate. Most
of the proposed activities represent provision of technical assistance (TA), as well as minor repair works within
existing structures in well demarcated and fenced areas owned by the Lesotho National Development Corporation
(LNDC) and MTI. Downstream impacts of the technical assistance activities are considered positive by potentially
reducing the environmental impacts of manufacturing firms associated with ESS2 related occupational health and
safety, ESS3 related environmental pollution, and ESS4 related community health and safety. The repairs, servicing
and end-of-life disposal of ICT equipment may result in ESS3 related environmental risks resulting from electronic
wastes (e-wastes), hazardous waste and solid wastes if not managed appropriately. The equipment required, the
associated cycle of replacement or upgrades, existing e-waste, hazardous and solid waste management measures
in project implementing entities, regulatory framework, and in-country capacities to manage end of life disposal of
electronic equipment and parts were analyzed during project preparation. To ensure the management of e-waste
and other hazardous waste, the Environmental and Social Management Framework includes a Waste Management
Plan (WMP). The WMP includes simple technical guidelines on how to manage the disposal of ICT equipment (end-
of-life and during repairs). The ESMF was disclosed both in-country and on the World Bank website on March 28,
2022. The potential use of pesticides and fertilizers in commercial agriculture will potentially result in ESS3 related
environmental pollution (including the degradation of surface water and groundwater). The project will set up a
Horticulture Incubator Center which will be established at an already existing facility at Mahobong that is owned by
the National University of Lesotho. This will involve minor civil works including rehabilitation of already buildings.
Rehabilitation works would potentially lead to ESS3 related noise and air pollution, generation of waste, loss of plant
cover, ESS2 and ESS4 related increase in occupational and community health and safety risks. The risks and impacts
will be managed through the preparation and implementation of sub-project specific ESMPs. The potential risks and
impacts associated with the project activities are considered to be predictable and temporary and/or reversible; low
in magnitude; site-specific, without likelihood of impacts beyond the actual footprint of the Project. No adverse
impacts on biodiversity and habitats are expected.
118. Potential social risks are: (i) possible exclusion of vulnerable and disadvantaged groups from fully
participating/benefiting from the project; (ii) challenges that may arise in conducting genuine stakeholder
engagement, particularly involving beneficiary MSMEs and informal business entities; and (iii) relatively limited
capacity of MTI in handling ESF requirements, including in relation to requirements on establishing and maintaining
a functioning project-level GRM. These potential risks are addressed through project ESMF which also include Labor
Management Procedures and GBV/SH/SEA Prevention and Response Action Plan, all proportionate to the risks. GBV
risks are associated with the working conditions of female employees in the textile and apparel industry (which will
Page 48 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
be addressed through the support provided under Sub-component 2.3 of the project). The ESMF was prepared and
disclosed on March 28, 2022. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan has been prepared and addresses the above risks.
During preparation, the project conducted several consultations with various stakeholders, and ESF instruments
were prepared considering feedback from stakeholders. Given the importance of outreach in both mitigating the
risks as well as ensuring successful project implementation, Component 3 of the project will, among others, finance
various stakeholder engagement activities which will be designed to take place throughout project implementation.
The project may also face social and environmental challenges related to transmission of communicable diseases
e.g., COVID-19 that could arise from people gathering for capacity building workshops and training activities. Despite
these potential risks, the project activities are expected to have positive developmental and social outcomes related
to business support services and financial products targeted at MSMEs and entrepreneurs, including vulnerable
groups such as women and unemployed youth. The Project will not involve capitalization/access to finance on-
lending to MSMEs/PFIs, and there will be no Financial Intermediaries under the Project at this stage. Thus, ESS9 is
deemed not relevant, and there are no associated downstream social and environmental risks that could have
resulted from sub-projects. The environmental and social risk ratings will be reviewed periodically throughout the
project life cycle to ensure that it continues to stay current with project implementation progress.
119. Climate. The project seeks to reduce climate vulnerability by contributing to adaptation interventions that increase
MSMEs’ financial resilience to climatic shocks such as droughts and floods through activities under multiple
subcomponents. Investments under subcomponent 1.1 will be made to minimize their exposure to climatic shocks.
Subcomponent 1.3, totaling US$10.5 million, focuses on climate adaptation by strengthening the private sector’s
resilience to climatic shocks. The average annual cost of disaster response to the government budget prior to the
pandemic is estimated at US$19.3 million. Most shocks (all but the COVID-19 pandemic) have been climatic shocks,
notably droughts and floods. This subcomponent will support the government with the establishment of an MSME
resilience account within the PMU to support MSMEs during climatic shocks, rather than rely on less reliable and
less timely mechanisms such as budget reallocations, borrowing, or humanitarian aid. Climate resilience will be
mainstreamed through the LEAP program under subcomponent 2.2. Finally, subcomponent 2.3 will strengthen the
climate resilience of the horticulture sector in Lesotho through its demonstration farms and training on climate
resilience techniques.
120. Gender Tag. Project activities will be designed to reduce gaps between men and women operating in the private
sector in Lesotho and promoting women’s economic empowerment. For example, the design of G2B systems
supported by the project will consider gender-based constraints; support for startup/MSME development and
financing will target women entrepreneurs and business owners; and skills development programs will pilot gender-
specific skills development programs. One specific gender gap addressed by the project is the lower coverage rate
for women-owned businesses by the credit bureau. Improvements will be measured by the indicator “Percentage
of women-owned enterprises recorded as being creditworthy in the credit bureau”. The baseline is 27 percent and
the end target of the project is 40 percent, which would indicate important improvement in the opportunity for
women-owned businesses to access credit.
121. Citizen engagement: Project preparation included consultations with the key private sector organizations and
intended project beneficiaries through in-person consultations and digital platforms. The team organized a series of
webinars (and in person sessions wherever feasible) with the representatives of the high potential value chains,
entrepreneurship support organizations, and organizations representing MSMEs. The PPD platform under
Component 3 supports continuous engagement during project implementation between the government and the
private sector, so that the project’s stakeholders are engaged throughout implementation. The citizen engagement
Page 49 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
indicator utilized is “Percent of enterprises engaged with the public private dialogue platform that assess the
platform as improving government responsiveness to private sector concerns”. The Component 2 design provide
for further feedback mechanisms for project beneficiaries as well as mechanisms to ensure that the feedback is
reflected in the project implementation arrangements.
122. Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). A GRM will be established for the project and maintained throughout project
implementation for project beneficiaries, citizens, and stakeholders. The GRM will be used for beneficiaries and
stakeholders of all project components. Responsibility for management and resolution of complaints will lie with
those at the beneficiary agencies at various levels who will work with community members and representatives of
vulnerable groups (women, youth, and others to be identified through ongoing implementation of environmental
and social standards). The project’s social specialist in the PMU will be responsible to ensure the GRM is operational,
including logging and tracking all complaints received and their timely resolution. Staffing and operational
procedures are further elaborated in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) and will be detailed in the POM. The
GRM will incorporate specific provisions to allow safe and ethical registration, documentation, and management of
complaints including Gender Based Violence/Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (GBV/SEA) complaints. A specific
reporting mechanism of GBV response protocol will be established.
V. GRIEVANCE REDRESS SERVICES
123. Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a World Bank (WB) supported
project may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or the WB’s Grievance
Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address
project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the WB’s
independent Inspection Panel which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of WB non-
compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been
brought directly to the World Bank's attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity to respond.
For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s corporate Grievance Redress Service (GRS),
please visit http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services/grievance-redress-
service. For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank Inspection Panel, please visit
www.inspectionpanel.org.
VI. KEY RISKS
124. The overall risk of the project is substantial. This is due to the anticipated risks in political and governance,
macroeconomic, technical design, and institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability. Mitigation
measures for each of these risks are described below. Each high and substantial risk will be reviewed throughout
implementation to ensure the most suitable risk mitigation measures are being utilized.
125. Political and Governance risk is rated High. Lesotho is characterized by an unstable political environment which
contributes to challenges in implementation of important policies and regulations. Over the past decade, Lesotho’s
key governance indicators have been generally better than the lower middle-income country and SSA averages, but
have been declining over time, particularly around political stability, and government effectiveness. The governing
coalition remains fragile with considerable possibility of repeated political changes during project implementation.
To mitigate this risk, the project has been designed to minimize activities that rely on policy or regulatory changes
that are difficult or unpredictable to advance in a situation of political instability and low government effectiveness.
Page 50 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
126. Macroeconomic risk is rated Substantial. Lesotho is currently classified as having a moderate risk of external debt
distress, impacted by the global recession triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic. Repeated disasters have increased
budget pressures leaving the government with a limited ability to respond to shocks. To address this, Lesotho is in
discussions with the IMF on a program that may bring some stability along with fiscal and other restrictions. The
disaster risk financing strategy proposed in the project is part of a strategy for managing macroeconomic risk. The
resilience instruments in the project are specifically intended to create a sustainable way to shield MSMEs from the
impact of shocks that does not depend on the government’s current fiscal situation.
127. Technical Design of the Project risk is rated Substantial. Project interventions are modeled on known interventions
from other World Bank projects. However, some of the interventions have technical risk due to the unique context
of Lesotho including a small country economy dependent on two primary export markets. For instance, the ability
to attract new investors is challenging to determine in a small economy especially in a post pandemic global trade
and investment scenario. To mitigate this risk, the technical design of the project has minimized elements that
require the government to build political consensus and follow through on longstanding reforms especially on
investment policy and business environment. Project implementation arrangements leverage private sector
technical and delivery capacity, rather than rely on government implementation, wherever possible and aim for long
term sustainability of the programs and instruments.
128. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability risk is rated Substantial. Despite strong
implementation of the PSCED2 project, the PMU already has dual responsibilities as it is also implementing an AfDB-
financed private sector project (which, however, is closing in December 2022). The PMU may still have responsibility
for implementing and closing the PSCED2 project, such as making final disbursements, while it takes on the
responsibilities for project implementation. The PMU has also been asked to support the development of the PMDU
which brings additional responsibilities and there is a need to enhance the technical capacity of the PMU. To mitigate
this, efforts will be made using resources under the current project to boost the capacity of the PMU team, including
adding two deputy project managers, dedicated E&S and M&E staff, and additional procurement staff, given the
size of the program. Efforts will be made to strengthen ownership of project implementation by key ministries as
much as possible.
.
Page 51 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
VII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING
Results Framework
COUNTRY: Lesotho
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project
Project Development Objectives(s)
The project development objective is to increase access to business support services and financial products targeted at MSMEs and entrepreneurs,
especially women and youth.
Project Development Objective Indicators
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO
Indicator Name PBC Baseline Intermediate Targets End Target
1 2 3 4 5
Increase access to business support services and financial products
Firms benefiting from
private sector initiatives 0.00 100.00 200.00 300.00 400.00 450.00 500.00
(CRI, Number)
Of which are women
20.00 20.00 25.00 30.00 40.00 45.00 50.00
owned (Percentage)
Of which are youth
20.00 20.00 20.00 25.00 25.00 25.00 25.00
owned (Percentage)
Value of financing (seed
funding, grants, partial
credit guarantee, credit
infrastructure 0.00 1,000,000.00 3,000,000.00 6,000,000.00 12,000,000.00 14,000,000.00 16,000,000.00
improvements, resilience
funding) accessed by
enterprises through the
Page 52 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO
Indicator Name PBC Baseline Intermediate Targets End Target
1 2 3 4 5
program (Amount(USD))
Of which is financing
accessed by enterprises
20.00 20.00 25.00 30.00 40.00 40.00 40.00
that are women-owned
(Percentage)
Percentage of enterprises
supported by the program
20.00 20.00 30.00 40.00 50.00 50.00 60.00
with increased revenue in
real terms (Percentage)
Of which are women
25.00 25.00 30.00 35.00 40.00 45.00 50.00
owned (Percentage)
PDO Table SPACE
Intermediate Results Indicators by Components
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO
Indicator Name PBC Baseline Intermediate Targets End Target
1 2 3 4 5
Enhancing Financial Inclusion and Resilience of MSMEs
Percent change in the
number of enterprises
20.00 20.00 25.00 30.00 35.00 40.00 45.00
accessing supported G2B
systems (Percentage)
Percentage of women-
owned enterprises
recorded as being 27.00 30.00 33.00 36.00 39.00 40.00 40.00
creditworthy.in the credit
bureau (Percentage)
Number of additional 0.00 25.00 50.00 100.00 150.00 200.00 250.00
Page 53 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO
Indicator Name PBC Baseline Intermediate Targets End Target
1 2 3 4 5
enterprises covered by the
partial credit guarantee
(PCG) scheme (Number)
Number of MSMEs
registered for coverage in
0.00 1,000.00 4,000.00 8,000.00 12,000.00 14,000.00 15,000.00
MSME Resilience Fund
database (Number)
Value of potential payouts
to MSMEs from private
0.00 0.00 0.00 6,000,000.00 6,000,000.00 12,000,000.00 12,000,000.00
capital mobilized for climate
resilience (Amount(USD))
Scaling Support for Entrepreneurship and MSMEs
Percentage of enterprises
supported by the
entrepreneurship and SME 25.00 25.00 30.00 35.00 40.00 45.00 50.00
programs with increased
employment (Percentage)
Number of startups and
innovative SMEs supported
through entrepreneurship 0.00 100.00 200.00 300.00 400.00 450.00 500.00
hub support programs
(Number)
Of Which are Women-
0.00 20.00 50.00 90.00 140.00 180.00 225.00
Owned (Number)
Number of enterprises
accessing early-stage 0.00 5.00 15.00 25.00 35.00 45.00 50.00
finance (Number)
Number of
entrepreneurship hub and
LEAP program supported 0.00 25.00 75.00 150.00 200.00 250.00 300.00
enterprises that adopted
new digital technologies
Page 54 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO
Indicator Name PBC Baseline Intermediate Targets End Target
1 2 3 4 5
(Number)
Number of LEAP fund
supported enterprises with
25% or greater increase in 0.00 50.00 100.00 150.00 200.00 225.00 250.00
revenues one year after
grant support (Number)
Number of supported
enterprises in targeted
0.00 10.00 20.00 30.00 40.00 45.00 50.00
value chains with increased
value of exports (Number)
Project Management and Implementation Support
Percent of enterprises
engaged with the public
private dialogue platform
that assess the platform as
60.00 65.00 70.00 75.00 80.00 80.00 80.00
improving government
responsiveness to private
sector concerns
(Percentage)
IO Table SPACE
UL Table SPACE
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators
Methodology for Data Responsibility for Data
Indicator Name Definition/Description Frequency Datasource
Collection Collection
Beneficiary PMU will collect the
Firms benefiting from private sector Annual PMU
organizations data from beneficiary
initiatives
' data (ESOs, agencies
Page 55 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
Horticulture
Incubator,
Textiles
Program
Operator) -
the indicator
will only
include firms
that benefit
directly from
project
financed
activities.
Beneficiary
organizations
' data (ESOs,
This disaggregate captures PMU collects data from
Horticulture
the share of women-owned Annual beneficiary PMU
Of which are women owned Incubator,
enterprises out of all the organizations
Textiles
enterprises.
Program
Operator)
This disaggregate captures Beneficiary
the share of youth-owned organizations
enterprises out of all the ' data (ESOs, PMU collects data from
enterprises, with youth Annual Horticulture beneficiary PMU
Of which are youth owned
referring to the official Incubator, organizations
country designated age Textiles
group (between 15-35 years Program
of age). Operator)
Page 56 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
This indicator measures the
value of financial support
received as a result of
project activities, in USD.
PMU will collect from
This aggregates the total
beneficiary
financing disbursed by the
Value of financing (seed funding, grants, organizations (financial
program through the seed Beneficiary
partial credit guarantee, credit institutions
funding, grants, and Annual organizations PMU
infrastructure improvements, resilience participating in the
contingency funds, as well ' data
funding) accessed by enterprises through PCG, LEAP unit, seed
as accessed by firms as a
the program financing facility, MoF
result of project support
Contingency Fund unit)
under the partial credit
guarantee and credit
infrastructure
improvements, by the
project end date.
This disaggregate captures
the share of women-owned
enterprises out of all the Beneficiary PMU to collect data
Of which is financing accessed by enterprises accessing Annual organization' from beneficiary PMU
enterprises that are women-owned financing. This is estimated s data organizations
by calculating the ratio of
women owned enterprises
to all enterprises.
This indicator measures the
ratio of enterprises that Beneficiary PMU to collect data
Percentage of enterprises supported by
reported a positive (greater Annual organizations from beneficiary PMU
the program with increased revenue in
than 0%) year-over-year ' data organizations
real terms
increase in revenue after a
year of engagement with
Page 57 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
the program and after
compensating for inflation.
The indicator does not
capture revenue increases
of those enterprises that
participated in low-
touchpoint activities of the
program, such as
participation in one-time
events or activities, such as
attending entrepreneurs
hub events, one-time
networking activities, and so
on.
This disaggregate captures
Beneficiary PMU to collect data
the share of women-owned
Annual organization' from beneficiary PMU
Of which are women owned enterprises out of all the
s data organizations
enterprises with increased
revenue.
ME PDO Table SPACE
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators
Methodology for Data Responsibility for Data
Indicator Name Definition/Description Frequency Datasource
Collection Collection
The indicator measures the
PMU to collect data
change in the utilization of
Percent change in the number of G2B systems from the agencies
G2B systems upgraded with Annual PMU
enterprises accessing supported G2B usage data managing the G2B
the support from the
systems systems
program. The change will be
tracked against the baseline
Page 58 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
value of number of active
users before upgradation of
the system.
The indicator measures the
proportion of women-
owned enterprises Central Bank
Percentage of women-owned enterprises PMU collects data from
supported by the program Annual credit bureau PMU
recorded as being creditworthy.in the the CBL credit bureau
who have been recorded in data
credit bureau
the Central Bank of
Lesotho's credit bureau as
being creditworthy.
The indicator measures how PMU to collect data
FIs that
Number of additional enterprises covered many enterprises are from LNDC which will
Annual utilize the PMU
by the partial credit guarantee (PCG) covered by the partial credit collect data from
PCG
scheme guarantee schemes with the participating FIs
support from the project.
This indicator measures the
Resilience PMU to collect from
Number of MSMEs registered for number of MSMEs that have
Annual fund MSME MSME Resilience Fund PMU
coverage in MSME Resilience Fund been registered for
database unit
database coverage by the MSME
Resilience Fund
PMU collects the data
Value of potential payouts to MSMEs Value of potential insurance Insurance
Annual from the insurance PMU
from private capital mobilized for climate payouts to MSMEs from the provider
provider
resilience resilience insurance plan
This indicator measures the
ratio of enterprises that Beneficiary PMU to collect data
Percentage of enterprises supported by
reported a positive (greater Annual organization' from beneficiary PMU
the entrepreneurship and SME programs
than 0%) year-over-year s data organizations
with increased employment
increase in full time
equivalent (FTE)
Page 59 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
employment after a year of
engagement with the
entrepreneurship and SME
programs. The indicator
does not capture
employment increases of
those enterprises that
participated in low-
touchpoint activities of the
program, such as
participation in one-time
events or activities, such as
attending entrepreneurs
hub events, one-time
networking activities, and so
on.
The indicator measures the
total number of unique PMU collects data from
enterprises that receiving Entrepreneur the Entrepreneurship
Number of startups and innovative SMEs
any form of technical or Annual ship Hub Hub which collects the PMU
supported through entrepreneurship hub
financial support from the data data from ESOs that the
support programs
program activities, including hub supports
through programs run by
the Hub ESOs.
PMU collects data from
Entrepreneur the Entrepreneurship
This disaggregate captures
Annual ship Hub Hub which collects the PMU
Of Which are Women-Owned the share that are women-
data data from ESOs that the
owned
hub supports
Page 60 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
The indicator captures the
total number of enterprises
that have successfully
received investment
Seed Facility PMU collects data from
Number of enterprises accessing early- financing (not grants) from Annual PMU
Data the Seed Facility.
stage finance the seed facility. It counts
the unique number of
enterprises that received
any amount of finance
disbursed.
The indicator measures the
number of unique
enterprises that are
supported by the
entrepreneurship hub or
LEAP program, have
received technical support Entrepreneur
PMU collects data from
Number of entrepreneurship hub and in gaining knowledge about ship Hub and
Annual the Entrepreneurship PMU
LEAP program supported enterprises that or procuring new digital LEAP
Hub and LEAP Program
adopted new digital technologies technologies, and have Program data
reported adopting one of
more digital technologies
through the training. To be
considered "adopted," the
digital technology must be
embedded into the business
process and practice.
Measures the number of
Number of LEAP fund supported PMU collects the data
LEAP fund supported Annual LEAP unit PMU
enterprises with 25% or greater increase from the LEAP unit
enterprises that have a
in revenues one year after grant support
significant increase in
Page 61 of 81
The World Bank
Lesotho Competitiveness and Financial Inclusion Project (P175783)
revenues (greater than 25%)
one year after receiving
LEAP grants (out of an
expected 350 grants
provided)
Implementin
g partners for
Measures how many subcompone
enterprises in targeted nt 2.3
Number of supported enterprises in PMU collects from
value chains supported by Annual (Horticulture PMU
targeted value chains with increased implementing partners
subcomponent 2.3 have an Incubator,
value of exports
increase value of exports Textiles
after receiving support program
operator)
The indicator measures how
Survey of
Percent of enterprises engaged with the enterprises view the
enterprises PMU to collect data
public private dialogue platform that responsiveness of
Annual that from the enterprises PMU
assess the platform as improving government to their
participate in participating in the PPD
government responsiveness to private engagement through the
the PPD
sector concerns public private dialogue
(PPD) platform.
ME IO Table SPACE
Page 62 of 81
ANNEX 1: Implementation Arrangements and Support Plan
PROJECT INSTITUTIONAL AND IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS
1. MTI is the implementing agency for all project subcomponents, working through a PMU which will have responsibility
for day-to-day planning, management, and supervision of project activities. The PMU of the current PSCED2 project
will also be the PMU of this project and there is expected to be seamless continuity in the transition to the new project
after approval. The PMU will work together with various public and private agencies and organizations to implement
the activities and it has established project implementation capacity since the first PSCED project. Implementation
arrangements are illustrated in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1. Implementation Arrangements
2. Subcomponent 1.1: G2B services. (Implementation) - Subcomponent 1.1 activities will be procured by the PMU, on
behalf of the beneficiary agencies, with supervision jointly managed by the PMU and beneficiary agencies.
3. Transition of the business registration system into the UNCTAD business licensing and business permitting system will
be carried out by UNCTAD’s implementation team, working with the OBFC, which hosts these systems. Upgrades to
the construction permitting, land administration, trade facilitation (customs and national single window), and cross-
border transport and transit operations systems, and upgrades apart from the transition to the business registration,
licensing, and permitting systems, will be carried out by a consulting firm or firms, working closely with the OBCF,
MCC, LAA and LRA, which host those systems.
4. The trade logistic modules for e-Certificate of Origin and Risk Based Selectivity will complement LRA’s ASYCUDA
system for Trade Logistics. The ASYCUDA system is also supported by UNCTAD which can assist on the development
Page 63 of 81
of additional modules. LAA is supported by LandFolio and ESRI South Africa which will also provide support for further
enhancements to the system.
5. Government will have a competitive procurement for an international consulting firm to develop the G2B
interoperability framework. The consulting firm will have as deliverable documenting the existing G2B systems and
they data exchange needs. They will also prepare the information architecture and governance which will guide the
implementation of the inter-agency transactions. After the framework is developed, its governance and technical
teams will decide hosting and security requirements, technical tools and techniques to be used on its
implementation.
6. The G2B payment gateway will be developed by a firm selected under competitive procurement. The firm will be hired
to work with G2B agencies to integrate the payment gateway with existing online processes. All payment transactions
will be documented and subsequently implemented using a unique payment gateway.
7. Subcomponent 1.2: Access to finance. (Implementation) - The main beneficiary agency for the credit infrastructure
activity is the CBL, under which the credit reporting system and the movable asset registry are housed. The MOF, MTI,
and MOHA are critical for the advancement of envisaged work under this subcomponent, particularly given the system
integration and inter-ministerial coordination required to strengthen the credit infrastructure system. The CBL will
work jointly with the PMU to identify and supervise the contractors that will work with the beneficiary agencies on
the various activities including diagnostics, assessments, and piloting of approaches and systems.
8. Under the risk sharing facility component, the MOF and DSBD are the two critical agencies required to advance
envisaged work. The envisaged PCG strategy will require input and coordination between these two ministries. Further
the determination with regards to the strategic advancement of a single public sector risk sharing facility will require
a joint decision. A technical working group will be constituted with representatives from MOF and DSBD respectively
to advance this component. The working group will also comprise representatives from the two guarantee schemes,
LNDC-PCG and PCGF.
9. Subcomponent 1.3: Establishment of an MSME resilience account within the PMU and strengthen delivery
mechanism to beneficiaries. (Implementation) - A DRF coordinator will be hired into the PMU to manage the
implementation of the MSME resilience subcomponent. The DRF coordinator will be financed using GRiF
resources. Their primary reporting line will be to the PMU director. They will also have a dashed reporting line to the
Budget Controller of the MOF, given the parallel capacity building that will be done through an ASA. The MSME
resilience funds will be held within the designated account at MTI, managed by the PMU. This account will disburse
resources upon occurrence of eligibly shocks to affected MSMEs. Initially perils covered will include climatic perils
(drought, flooding, heavy snowfall, hail) and pandemics, with a view to expanding to additional perils as operational
experience is gained. This will strengthen the government’s ability to finance high frequency, low severity climatic
shocks to MSMEs and reduce reliance on budget reallocations or humanitarian funding. The project will provide
technical assistance to the Disaster Management Authority (DMA) to strengthen their capacity to declare states of
disaster and sub-national states of disaster. The latter is particularly important to strengthen the financial resilience
of MSMEs to more localized shocks, such as flooding or hail. Declaring sub-national states of disaster is within their
power, but this has not been exercised often. Capacity building will be done through knowledge-sharing and south-
south knowledge exchanges.
10. Subcomponent 1.3: Co-financing premiums for the sovereign insurance backstop. (Implementation): The project
will support the design and procurement of a sovereign insurance backstop mechanism to the MSME resilience
Page 64 of 81
account within the PMU. The sovereign insurance backstop will activate for severe shocks, to reduce budget volatility
and strengthen the governments’ financing for shock response. Insurance payouts will be channeled into the account
within the PMU, providing the Government with additional liquidity in the event of severe shocks. This additional
liquidity will reduce the need to reallocate budget to finance shock response, as well as enable the Government to
prepare and launch a more robust shock response. It is likely that the insurance product developed will be parametric,
based on remote sensing and / or weather station data given data is poor in Lesotho and the insurance industry is
nascent. The parametric insurance will initially focus on drought, given it is the most costly and detrimental to
development peril in Lesotho. As with any parametric insurance product, basis risk is a key concern. Thus a value for
money (VFM, see next paragraph) analysis will be conducted on a sovereign insurance product, with
recommendations on how to strengthen the efficacy of the product.
11. Subcomponent 1.3: Strengthen risk finance capacity in Government. (Implementation): Strengthening capacity on
the implementation of the MSME resilience account, adoption risk transfer instruments, and scaling up delivery
mechanisms is critical for effective implementation. Capacity development will focus on supporting the MOF draft and
adopt a National Disaster Risk Finance Policy. Capacity development activities are expected to include: (i) organizing
a capacity development series to strengthen understanding of the benefits to financial protection and a risk layering
strategy for different line ministries; (ii) convening a knowledge sharing event to explore international best practices
on the development and implementation of risk instruments (iii) working in collaboration with risk carriers, such as
the African Risk Capacity, strengthen capacity on risk transfer options, including the sovereign insurance backstop;
and (iv) organizing a seminar on strengthening financial literacy, expanding financial inclusion, and scaling up digital
payments, particularly G2B payments, for vulnerable populations, particularly women-owned MSMEs. The project will
also support the expansion of and digitizing the list of informal MSMEs, and actively seek to maximize the number of
women owned MSMEs in this database, in coordination with the business registry. The acute need to expand this
database was evident during the Government’s implementation of the Covid-19 Relief Fund, as there were significant
delays when the Government sought to provide relief payments to MSMEs. The project will also support component
1.1, strengthening of Government to Business (G2B) payments, to ensure disbursements from the MSME resilience
account in the PMSU reaches beneficiaries rapidly, with focus on vulnerable women owned MSMEs. Connecting pre-
arranged funding to national delivery mechanisms is important to ensuring a timely response during shocks. Scaling
up digital financial services and enabling the entry of fintech firms can play an important role in enabling expedited
G2B payments. The G2B payment system will build on the success of the recent COVID-19 relief grants. This system
proved a very effective delivery mechanism to MSMEs, however it was set up quickly and was not overly robust (used
spreadsheets, prone to errors).
12. Parallel ASA to strengthen capacity of MOF: In parallel to the CAFI project, the FCI team will utilize an ASA to
strengthen the capacity of MOF to develop and implement long-term risk financing instruments that will activate after
the completion of the project. First, the ASA will support MOF to strengthen its existing Continency Fund through the
adoption of regulations. The Contingency Fund in the MOF is established under the Public Financial Management and
Accountability Act (2011) in Lesotho. The World Bank will support the MOF draft and adopt the regulations. The
regulations will provide a robust governance process for implementing the Contingency Fund including fund
governance, the disbursement and procurement processes, financial management of resources and auditing and
reporting requirements. The regulations will also establish a private sector resilience window under the fund. This
window will disburse resources upon occurrence of eligibly shocks to affected MSMEs. Initially perils covered will
include climatic perils (drought, flooding, heavy snowfall, hail) and pandemics, with a view to expanding to additional
perils as operational experience is gained.
Page 65 of 81
13. Once the CAFI project is completed, the MSME resilience funds would shift from the PMU to the MSME Resilience
Window within MOF’s Contingency Fund. The sovereign insurance that will be procured through this project will then
provide surge financing into the Contingency Fund. This will strengthen sustainability of the disaster risk financing
instruments after the completion of the project. The ASA would also finance a ‘risk finance operations manual’ to
strengthen the transparency and accountability of disbursements from the Contingency Fund. The risk finance
operations manual will be published, and cover at a minimum the following details:
a. Clear triggers to enable rapid disbursements from the Contingency Fund. As this instrument is designed to
manage the impact of lower-level shocks, soft triggers will be used to trigger disbursements, in combination with
hard triggers used for the sovereign insurance backstop.
b. A list of eligible beneficiaries for a given shock event. Justification for inclusion of beneficiary MSMEs must be
made against clear criteria. This could include aspects such as geographical location or sector within which the
MSME operates.
c. The information which is required in a ‘Disbursement Report’ which will be prepared by the DRF coordinator to
justify a disbursement of funds from the Contingency Fund. This report will explain the shock event, its impact on
MSMEs and the proposed response with costing. This report will be reviewed by a technical committee (next
point).
d. The establishment of an inter-agency DRF technical committee - including for example officials from the MOF,
MSBD, MTI and Disaster Management Authority. The committee will validate the disbursement report. The report
will then be sent to the Budget Controller and the Principal Secretary of the Ministry of Finance for approval and
release of funds from the Contingency Fund. From there, the MOF will disburse funds from the Contingency Fund
to affected MSMEs.
e. Exact details on the flow of funds from the Ministry of Finance to shock affected MSMEs.
f. The risk financing mechanisms will be implemented in close coordination with the DMA ensuring close alignment
of the disaster risk financing instruments with ongoing disaster risk mitigation, reduction and adaptation activities
of the Government.
14. Subcomponent 2.1: Entrepreneurship Ecosystem. (Implementation): Subcomponent 2.1 implementation will be
managed by the PMU. The PMU will hire experts to support them to run a fair and transparent international selection
of two partners:
i. an operating agency to run the Entrepreneurship Hub and the ecosystem development activities.
ii. a fund management partner that will run the seed financing facility and associated acceleration
program.
15. Once the Entrepreneurship Hub operating agency has been selected the PMU will have two roles: (i) monitoring and
supervising the operating agency and (ii) disbursing the grants to the ESOs and the startups/innovative SMEs incubated
under the ESO programs.
16. Six months into the program, once the first batch of ESOs has been certified and the call for application to fund the
ESO incubation programs is underway, the PMU will hire a firm to prepare the call for fund managers to manage the
seed financing facility and accelerator program. This call would summarize the investment environment and the
governance model for the fund. The firm would then run a communication campaign to attract the seed-investment
fund managers. This activity will take approximately 6 months. The program will have a steering board comprising
public and private sector representatives in equal numbers.
Page 66 of 81
17. Once the fund management company is selected, it will take approximately 6 months to get legal agreement for the
seed financing facility to begin operating. The facility should be ready to invest within 21 to 24 months from the start
of the project. Institutional bodies, such as LNDC, BEDCO and potentially CBL, may be part of the steering board of the
seed financing facility. However, the investment committee (IC) will be selected by the fund managers and should
include 2 or more independent experts.
18. The following figures 1.2 and 1.3 describe the implementation timelines over the first two years of the project:
Figure 1.2: Implementation timeline for first two years of the project
Page 67 of 81
1
S e le c t
e x p e r ie n c e din
t e r n a o n a lo
p e r a n g
a g e n c y
E c o s y s t e m
b u ild in g d e a l
o w g e n e r a o n
p r o g r a m m
S e e d In v e s t m e n t
c a p a c it y b u ild in g
p r o g r a m m
2
C a ll fo r
a p p lic a o n ,
C a p a c ita n g
C e r c a o n o f
1 0 In c u b a to rs
3
F irs t c a ll fo r
in c u b a o n
p ro je c ts
P r e p a r in g lein
s t u oe
n v ir o n m
g a l an
a l
e n t
n d
4
CA ac
5
In c u b a to r 1 , in c u b a te
In c u b a to r 2 , in c u b a te
In c u b a to r 3 , in c u b a te
In c u b a to r 4 , in c u b a te
In c u b a to r 5 , in c u b a te
S e c o n d c a ll fo r
in c u b a o n
p ro je c ts
ll f o r a p p lic a o n
c e le r a t o r s e e d
f u n d m a g a e r
6 7
s 1 0 e n te rp ris e s fo r 1 2 M o n th s
s 1 0 e n te rp ris e s fo r 1 2 M o n th s
s 1 0 e n te rp ris e s fo r 1 2 M o n th s
s 1 0 e n te rp ris e s fo r 1 2 M o n th s
s 1 0 e n te rp ris e s fo r 1 2 M o n th s
In cu b a to r 6 , in cu b a te s 1 0 e n te rp rise s fo r 1 2 M o n th s
In cu b a to r 7 , in cu b a te s 1 0 e n te rp rise s fo r 1 2 M o n th s
In cu b a to r 8 , in cu b a te s 1 0 e n te rp rise s fo r 1 2 M o n th s
In cu b a to r 9 , in cu b a te s 1 0 e n te rp rise s fo r 1 2 M o n th s8
In cu b a to r 1 0 , in cu b a te s 1 0 e n te rp rise s fo r 1 2 M o n th s
S t a r t
F u n d n e g o a o n s
d e a l
a n d s e t u p
o w
8
Figure 1.3: Implementation timeline for the project cycle
19. Subcomponent 2.2: Scaling the Lesotho Enterprise Assistance Program (LEAP) for MSMEs. (Implementation) - The
LEAP program is currently managed by a small (3 person) team within the PSCED2 PMU. The placement of the LEAP
management at the PMU is designed to ensure that selection of supported MSMEs is objective and merit-based and
allows for close implementation support by the World Bank. This arrangement will continue under the CAFI project at
least for the initial years of implementation. Over time, consideration will be given to migrating the LEAP management
to another organization. This could be an international consulting company, a mission-aligned organization such as
the entrepreneurship hub or seed financing fund manager, or a public agency such as BEDCO or LNDC. Such a
migration might support sustainability beyond the project implementation period but might also reduce the oversight
by the World Bank and PMU. As such, the migration will be considered only after the LEAP program has established a
track record of strong implementation under the CAFI project.
20. The current 3-person LEAP management team will be expanded by 1-2 additional staff given the additional window
and greater program funding being added under CAFI. Specifically, 1-2 additional grants officer(s) will be hired. Regular
monitoring and evaluation (M&E), financial management, and procurement for the LEAP program will continue to be
carried out by the PMU staff assigned these roles. Supplemental M&E activities will be carried out by consultants hired
by the LEAP team as necessary. In particular, to foster continual improvements in the LEAP program, the project will
support a mid-term evaluation of the impacts of LEAP grants under both windows, carried out by an independent
M&E contractor.
21. Details of the two LEAP windows will be documented in a LEAP operational manual that will be subject to approval by
the World Bank. This will include eligibility criteria, approval and review processes, eligible use of grant funds, grant
size limits, procedures on disbursement of funds, M&E arrangements, recipient reporting requirements, and similar
details.
Page 68 of 81
22. External participation in the LEAP program governance will be considered to improve the transparency and impact of
the program. First, a LEAP steering committee with relevant public and private stakeholders will be considered. The
steering committee would periodically review and adjust the strategic direction of the LEAP program. Second,
independent evaluators for grant applications will be considered. These could be drawn from organizations that have
an interest in developing Lesotho’s private sector but no direct ties to the LEAP applicants, such as entrepreneurship
hubs, technical experts, or management consultancies.
23. Subcomponent 2.3: Support for the textile and apparel GVC. (Implementation) - The program will be designed and
delivered by a joint ILO-ITC team of technical experts and consultants (drawing upon their experience in other
countries such as Egypt, Tunisia, and Madagascar as well as the global Better Work program) and will be managed by
a competitively selected Chief Technical Officer. The Chief Technical Officer and nationally recruited project officers
will report to the Project Coordinator and the program will be implemented under the oversight of a Technical Steering
Committee chaired by the Principal Secretary of MTI and which includes the LNDC, Labor Commissioner, LTEA, LGMA
and ALEB. The participating firms will be selected through an open application process and several calls for applications
to identify cohorts will be launched. The eligible firms need to enter into a performance agreement with the Project
to ensure compliance with implementation arrangements and timelines for activities, data sharing and reporting
requirements.
24. Subcomponent 2.3: Expansion of smallholder horticulture production through the Horticulture Incubation program.
The Horticulture Incubation program will be established as a public-private partnership between the Government and
an experienced private service provider/operator who will be selected through an appropriate international
competitive process. The private service provider /operator will design and operate the incubation program as well
as manage and operate the Horticulture Incubator Center based on agreed output and outcome indicators. The
operator/manager will report to the Project Coordinator.
25. The provisioning of physical space and resources by the incubator includes facilities in which the clients can conduct
operations, office space, meeting facilities and certain required farming resources including access to the existing
demonstration farms. The selection of farmers/agribusiness SMEs into the incubation program will be based on an
open selection process and carefully established criteria including access to adequate land (soil suitability and farming
acreage), access to irrigation infrastructure (financed through the SADP2 or the Millennium Challenge Corporation
program), motivation and demonstrated commitment of the farmers/entrepreneurs, availability of financial and other
in-kind resources and willingness to commit to at least a three-year incubation program. Several cohorts of
farmers/agribusiness SMEs will be selected to participate in a pre-incubation program that provides training, office
space and access to basic inputs such as seeds/seedlings and other farm inputs. Farmers/SMEs that graduate from the
pre-incubation program and meet established criteria will be eligible to be part of a full incubation program that
provides more tailored training and technical support/extension services to scale their businesses and access to
commercial financing opportunities. It is expected that around 100 farmers/agribusiness SMEs will be selected for the
pre-incubation program of which between 10-15 farms/agribusiness SMEs are expected to qualify for the full
incubation program.
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
26. The financial management assessment was carried out in accordance with the World Bank’s Operational Policy and
the Financial Management Manual issued by the Financial Management Board. The objective of the assessment was
to determine whether the project implementing unit PMU within MTI have acceptable financial management
arrangements, which will ensure: (1) that the project funds are used only for the intended purposes in an efficient and
Page 69 of 81
economical way, (2) the preparation of accurate, reliable and timely periodic financial reports, and (3) safeguard of
the assets. The overall conclusion of the financial management assessment is that the project’s financial management
has an overall risk-rating of Moderate and the financial management arrangements satisfy the World Bank’s minimum
requirements under the Bank’s policy and procedures on financial management.
27. While the discipline of Public Financial Management (PFM) has seen development in the last few years, there is still a
general lack of effective systems, capacity, and experience. Work has started on the development of a new legal
framework, methodologies and systems for budget, budget execution, accounting, reporting and oversight, but actual
capacity at the moments remains largely weak. The ability of the Government to attract and retain qualified FM staff
remains under pressure and the Bank assisted projects have therefore traditionally relied on the outside advisors
(finance, procurement, and technical) to assist projects in their implementation efforts.
28. To address the weakness in critical PFM issues, the government is implementing a Public Financial Management
Reform Action Plan (PFMRAP), with the support of the World Bank, EU, AfDB, and IMF. This program seeks to
strengthen fiscal management institutions, accountability, and oversight for improved service delivery.
29. For the project, the implication currently is that full utilization of the government PFM system is not yet possible.
Elements that will be relied upon is the independent audit by the Office of the Auditor General.
Risk assessment and mitigation
30. Table 1.1 below summarizes the results of the risk assessment and the mitigation measures.
Page 70 of 81
Table 1.1: Financial Management Risk Assessment and Mitigation
Description of Risk Risk Mitigation Measures Condition of Residual Risk/
incorporated in Project Effectiveness (Risk) rating
Implementation (Yes/ No)
INHERENT RISKS
Country Level
There are still notable challenges in the PFM reforms, The Government has acknowledged No S
namely, the rollout of the IFMIS and implementation these challenges and action plans
of the PF MRAP. have been identified with the
support of the donors to work on
these cha llenges.
Entity Level
Should new different personnel be recruited, they will Skills transfer and Institutional N M
possess limited experience in the financial memory will be managed.
management aspects of bank-funded projects.
Project Level
The project is handling some policy reform issues that No M
take longer to be finalized.
Overall Inherent Risk Residual Risk: M
CONTROL RISK
Budgeting
The budgeting process may not be comprehensive and Budgets will be prepared based on No M
realistic to provide an adequate basis for performance approved procurement plans.
monitoring Monthly and quarterly reports will
be produced to report and monitor
variances.
Accounting and financial reporting
There is no identified risk. The project will use the L
existing Tompro accounting system and it has proven
adequate for the current project.
Internal control
There is a risk that adherence to approved policies and The project will use the current No M
procedures may be negatively affected by non- project implementation manual and
adherence to thereof. will be updated based on lessons
and experiences from the past
project.
Funds flow
No identified risk No L
Auditing
Page 71 of 81
Description of Risk Risk Mitigation Measures Condition of Residual Risk/
incorporated in Project Effectiveness (Risk) rating
Implementation (Yes/ No)
No identified risk No L
The project has been submitting acceptable audit
reports on time.
Overall Control Risk M
Overall Risk M
H – High S – Substantial M – Moderate L – Low
31. Strengths: Existing financial management arrangements processes are adequate. The current project has been
receiving unqualified audit opinions with immaterial findings in the management letter. The overall financial
management ratings in the ISRs have been consistently Satisfactory.
32. Weakness: There is no identifiable weakness unless the project may change the entire current personnel. Then the
institutional memory will be eroded.
FM strategy and approach for implementation support
33. The day-to-day operations of the project will be overseen by a PMU that will be headed by a qualified project manager.
In addition, the PMU will include a Financial Manager who will oversee the FM aspects of the project. The financial
management arrangements are described below.
34. Budgeting arrangements: The PMU will prepare an annual budget for the project based on approved annual work
plans, and the Financial Manager will be responsible for producing variance analysis reports comparing planned to
actual expenditures on monthly and quarterly bases. The periodic variance analysis will enable the timely
identification of deviations from the budget. These reports will be part of the interim unaudited financial reports (IFRs)
that will be submitted to the Bank on quarterly basis. The Financial Manager will coordinate the budgeting process in
conjunction with the Project Manager.
35. Accounting arrangements: The project will use the existing computerized accounting software called TOMPRO for
project financial management and the production of accounts. The accounting software is capable of transaction
processing, production of project annual financial statements, IFRs, and other reports as required for the effective
management and monitoring of the project. The project is using the cash basis of accounting as prescribed under the
Cash Basis Standard issued by the International Public Sector Accounting Standards Board. The accounting procedures
are spelt out in the Project Implementation Manual.
Internal auditing, internal controls and staffing arrangements
36. Internal Auditing: Due to the need to uphold good governance principles, the project will be included in the annual
internal audit plans. The internal audit cited budget constraints as one of the possible limitations in covering the
project. To mitigate the risk, an additional budget will be made available under operating costs to support the internal
audit coverage.
Page 72 of 81
37. Internal Control Systems: The PMU will use the Project Implementation Manual from the ongoing project, and it will
be updated to accommodate new activities under the new phase. The manual will be updated and approved by
negotiations.
38. Staffing arrangements: The Finance Manager will take the ultimate responsibility for the financial management
function. She will be supported by a Finance Officer. The staffing arrangement will be continually reviewed during the
project implementation, and if the need arises for additional capacity in the PMU, additional staffing will be
considered.
DISBURSEMENT AND FUND FLOWS
39. Banking arrangements: The PMU (through the Minister of Finance) will open a pooled Designated Account
denominated in United States Dollars at the Central Bank to receive the funds from IDA and TF. A project account
denominated in Maloti will be opened and used to make local payments. This local account will be reimbursed with
funds from US dollar account, although minimum balance needs to be kept in this account.
40. Funds flow arrangements: Upon effectiveness of the financing agreement and submission of a withdrawal application,
the Bank will disburse an initial amount equivalent to six months expenditure into the Designated
Account. Subsequent disbursements will be made on the basis of the approved projected expenditures for six months,
which will form part of the IFRs.
41. The project will also have the option of using: (i) the Direct Payment disbursement method, involving direct payments
from the credit account on behalf of the Government and to the suppliers of goods and services that have a value
above a set threshold; and (ii) the Reimbursement disbursement method, whereby the Government makes payments
for eligible expenditures and submits withdrawal application for reimbursement.
42. The disbursement details will be spelled out in the project’s Disbursement Letter.
Financial reporting arrangements
43. The PMU will prepare quarterly un-audited IFRs for the project in form and content satisfactory to the Bank, which
will be submitted to the Bank within 45 days after the end of the quarter to which they relate. The IFRs submitted to
the Bank will contain the following statements:
• Statement of Sources and Uses of Funds;
• Statement of Uses of Funds by Project Activity/Component;
• Designated Account (DA) Activity Statement;
• Bank Statements for both the Designated and Project Account;
• Summary Statement of DA Expenditures for Contracts subject to Prior Review; and
• Summary Statement of DA Expenditures not subject to Prior Review.
44. The annual financial statements will be prepared using International Public Sector Accounting Standards. These
statements shall be submitted to the Bank within 6 months after the end of the financial year. The accounts/financial
statements will comprise of:
Page 73 of 81
a. A Statement of Sources and Uses of Funds/Cash Receipts and Payments, which recognizes all cash receipts, cash
payments and cash balances controlled by the entity; and separately identifies payments by third parties on behalf
of the entity.
b. The Accounting Policies Adopted and Explanatory Notes. The explanatory notes should be presented in a
systematic manner with items on the Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments being cross referenced to any
related information in the notes; and
c. A Management Assertion that Bank funds have been expended in accordance with the intended purposes as
specified in the relevant World Bank legal agreement.
Auditing arrangements
45. The project financial statements will be audited by the Office of the Auditor General in accordance with International
Standards on Auditing, and the audit report together with the management letter and management responses will be
submitted to the Bank within six months after the financial year-end.
46. The external auditor will be required to express a single opinion on the project financial statements. In addition, a
detailed management letter containing the auditor’s assessment of the internal controls, accounting system and
compliance with financial covenants in the financing agreement, suggestions for improvement, and management’s
response to the auditor’s management letter will be prepared and submitted to management for follow-up actions.
Audit Report Due Date
Project audited financial statements and management Within six months after the end of the financial year i.e., 30
letter September
Financial Management Action Plan
47. The following actions need to be taken to enhance the financial management arrangements for the project:
Action Date due by Responsible
Update Project Implementation Manual By negotiations PMU
Financial Management Implementation Support Plan
48. Based on the outcome of the FM risk assessment, the following implementation support plan (Table 1.2) is
proposed. The objective of the implementation support plan is to ensure the project maintains a satisfactory financial
management system throughout the project’s life.
Table 1.2: Financial Management Implementation Support Plan
FM Activity Frequency
Desk reviews
Interim financial reports review Quarterly
Audit report review of the program Annually
Review of other relevant information Continuous as they become available
On site visits
Page 74 of 81
Review of overall operation of the FM system Annual
Monitoring of actions taken on issues highlighted in audit As needed
reports, management letters, and other reports
Conclusion of the assessment
49. The conclusion of the assessment is that, subject to implementation of the action plan shown above, the financial
management arrangements are acceptable to the Bank. The overall residual risk rating is Moderate hence the project
will have an on-field supervision at least once a year.
50. The financial management arrangements were validated by the current Finance and Project Managers in the PMU.
PROCUREMENT
51. The Project Procurement risk rating based on PRAMS is Moderate.
Selection of Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services: Methods and Prior Review Threshold
Table 1.3: Selection Methods and Thresholds for Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services
Approved Selection Methods** Thresholds for Method (US$ equivalent)
Open International (Goods, IT Systems Equal to or more than US$1 million
and Non-Consulting Services)
Open National (Goods, IT Systems and < US$1 million
Non-Consulting Services) – Open
Tender or as stipulated
RFQ (Goods, IT Systems and Non-
Less or equal to US$100,000
Consulting Services)
Open International (Works) Equal to or more than US$7 million
Open National (Works) Less than US$7 million
RFQ (works) Less or equal to US$200,000
Framework Agreements (Goods, In accordance with Para 6.57 to 6.59 and 7.33 Annex XV:
Works & Consulting Services) Frameworks Agreements of Procurement Regulations, and
with prior agreement in Procurement plan with the World
Bank.
Direct Contracting No threshold; meet requirements of World Bank’s
Procurement Regulations
Page 75 of 81
52. In addition to the above, there are other selection arrangements available in the World Bank Procurement
Regulations, Fourth Edition, dated November 2020 which upon Bank prior clearance can be incorporated for use under
the project.
53. Prior Review (Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services): The details of the Procurement review / oversight are
defined in the Annex II of the Regulations for Borrowers. The following would be subject to Prior review of the Bank
regardless of the Method of selection
54. The details of the Procurement review / oversight are defined in the Annex II of the Regulations for borrowers. Table
1.4 lists the prior review thresholds of the World Bank regardless of the Method of selection:
Table 1.4. Prior Review Thresholds for Works and Goods, IT Systems, and Non-consulting Services
Type of procurement World Bank’s Prior review threshold48 *
Works All procurements estimated to cost USD 15 million or more
Goods, IT Systems, and Non- All procurements estimated to cost USD 4 million or more
consulting Services
*These thresholds are for the purposes of the initial procurement plan for the first 18 months. The
thresholds may be increased or decreased based on re-assessment of risks assessment. All contracts not
subject to prior review will be post-reviewed (once annually, sampling minimum of 15% post review
contracts).
I. For contracts subject to prior review, the Borrower shall seek the Bank’s no objection before agreeing
to:
a. an extension of the stipulated time for execution of a contract that has an impact on the
planned completion of the project.
b. any material modification of the scope of the Works, Goods, Non-consulting services or
Consulting Services, or other significant changes to the terms and conditions of the contract.
c. any variation order or contract amendment (except in cases of extreme urgency), including due
to extension of time, that singly or combined with all previous variation orders or amendments,
increases the original contract amount by more than 15 percent; or
d. the proposed termination of the contract.
The Borrower / Implementing Agency shall provide a copy of all amendments to the contract to the Bank for
its records.
II. Prequalification
Not Applicable
Page 76 of 81
Domestic Preference. The provision of domestic preference shall not be applied in the evaluation of bids in
accordance with Annex VI of the Regulations.
III. Reference to Standard Procurement Documents
For all open international market approaches, World Bank’s Standard Procurement Documents (SPD) are to
be used. The latest versions of the SPD are available in the World Bank website.
IV. Any Other Special Procurement Arrangements
When approaching the national market, as agreed in the Procurement Plan, the National Open Tender
procedure may be used. The specific qualifications requirements, for use of national open competitive
procurement, is set out in Section V, para 5.3 of the Procurement Regulations and shall be applied.
Other national procurement arrangements (other than national open competitive procurement), that may
be applied by the Borrower (such as limited/restricted competitive bidding, request for
quotations/shopping, direct contracting), shall be consistent with the Bank’s Core Procurement Principles
and ensure that the Bank’s Anti-Corruption Guidelines and Sanctions Framework and contractual remedies
set out in its Legal Agreement apply.
As National Standard Procurement Documents are not yet developed following PPAD 2015, the Bank’s
Standard RFB Goods and RFP Consulting Services dated July 2016 or the latest version available in the World
Bank website Procurement section will be used as a base and incorporating suitable modifications and the
same would be agreed with the Bank subject to national competition.
Selection of Consultants: Methods and Prior Review Threshold
55. Selection methods of procurement of Consultants' Services (Firms): The Approved Selection Methods as reflected in
the Section VII of the procurement regulations are listed in Table 1.5.
Table 1.5. Selection Methods and Thresholds for Consultants (Firms)
Method of Procurement Thresholds for Methods
Quality and Cost Based As per requirements of para 7.3 of the Regulations (for any value,
Selection (QCBS) but usually for assignments average complexity and value US$300K
or above)
Quality Based Selection (QBS) As per requirements of para 7.8 to 7.10 of the Regulations (for any
value, but activities of highly specialized and high downstream
impact);
Selection based on a Fixed As per requirements of para 7.4 and 7.5 of the Regulations
Budget (FBS)
Selection Based on Least Cost As per requirements of para 7.6 and 7.7 of the Regulations
Basis (LCS)
Page 77 of 81
Selection based on As per requirements of para 7.11 and 7.12 of the Regulations
Consultant’s ualification
Contracts estimated to cost equivalent of USD 300,000 or less per
(CQS)
contract
Framework Agreements All procurement that meets the requirements as per Para 6.57 to
6.59 of Procurement Regulations, and with prior agreement in PP
with the Bank.
Direct Contracting Must meet the requirements of Para 7.13 to 7.15 of the
Regulations, and with prior agreement in PP with the Bank.
The short list may consist of all National consultants in case the estimated cost is less than USD 100,000
and US$300,000 for Engineering & construction supervision Consultants.
56. Procurement methods for Selection of Individual Consultants (IC): The Approved Selection Methods for IC as
reflected in the Section VII of the procurement regulations are shown in Table 1.6.
Table 1.6. Selection Methods and Thresholds for Individual Consultants
Method of Procurement Thresholds for Methods
Open Competitive As per requirements of para 7.36 and 7.37 of the Regulations (default
Selection for any value, usually higher values)
Limited Competitive As per requirements of para 7.38 of the Regulations
Selection
Direct Selection Must meet the requirements of Para 7.39 of the Regulations, and with
prior agreement in PP with the Bank
*Shall meet the requirements as stated in Regulations
Terms of Reference (ToR) for all consultancy contracts shall be furnished to the Bank for its prior review and
No Objection.
57. Prior Review (Consultants): The details of the Procurement Review / Oversight are defined in the Annex II of the
Regulations for Borrowers. Table 1.7 lists prior review thresholds of the Bank for consultants regardless of the
Method of selection:
Table 1.7. Prior Review Thresholds for Consultants (Firms and Individuals)
Type of procurement Bank’s Prior review threshold*
Consultant Firm All procurements estimated to cost USD 2 million or more
Consultant Individual All procurement estimated to cost USD 400,000 or more
Page 78 of 81
* These thresholds are for the purposes of the initial procurement plan for the first 18 months. The
thresholds may be increased or decreased based on re-assessment of risks assessment. All contracts not
subject to prior review will be post-reviewed.
STRATEGY AND APPROACH FOR IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT AND PLAN AND RESOURCE REQUIREMENTS
58. The World Bank will conduct regular six-month implementation support missions to ensure efficient implementation
of the project. Frequent engagement with the PMU will occur virtually to address any issues or challenges in a timely
manner. This builds on the approach to implementation support that worked successfully under the PSCED2.
59. The project will be implemented by the same PMU that is currently implementing the PSCED2 project under MTI. The
PSCED2 PMU has a strong performance track record of over 15 years and has established strong project
implementation capacity as well as working relationships with key agencies and Ministries across the Government.
The PSCED2 project will conclude on June 30, 2022, allowing the PMU to be available and ready for CAFI project
implementation from the outset of the project. The PMU will be responsible for all fiduciary aspects of the project
including FM and procurement activities. The PMU is fully financed from the Component 3 budget.
60. The PMU will also act as a capacity building partner for the PMDU. This brings some additional responsibility for the
PMU but also provides the PMU with access to the highest levels of government if implementation challenges arise.
This should be beneficial to successful implementation of the project. The PMU also currently acts as the implementing
agency for the AfDB’s private sector development project. This has facilitated strong coordination between the Bank
and AfDB’s complementary projects and that coordination can be expected to continue under the new project while
the AfDB project is reaching closure.
61. The PMU has established strong working relationships through the current project with the relevant Ministries and
agencies which is expected to continue through this project and the PMU will continue to provide capacity building
support to the agencies as needed. The project will endeavor to transfer implementation responsibilities to the
beneficiary agencies to the extent possible to build sustainability. The key project beneficiary entities are listed below.
Table 1.8. Beneficiary Agencies
Sub-Component Beneficiary Agencies
1.1 Enhancing G2B Digital Services to More Effectively Serve MSMEs OBFC, DTT, MPWT
1.2 Improving Access to Financial Services MOF, LRA, CBL
1.3 Improving the Resilience of the Private Sector to Climatic Disasters and Shocks MTI, MOF, LRA, CBL
2.1 Establishing a Digital Entrepreneurship Hub and Seed Financing Facility MSBD, BEDCO
2.2 Scaling Up the LEAP Program for MSMEs MSBD, BEDCO
2.3 Expanding SME Participation in High Potential Value Chains LNDC, Labor Commissioner, NUL
3. Project Management and Implementation Support MTI, PMDU
DTT = Department of Traffic and Transport
MPWT = Ministry of Public Works and Transport
Page 79 of 81
ANNEX 2: Climate Risk in Lesotho
1. Lesotho is highly exposed to climatic and other economic shocks. According to Lesotho’s National Adaptation
Programme of Action, due to its geographical position and geophysical features that are primarily characterized by
mountainous terrain, coupled with its poor economic situation, Lesotho is in a critical state of vulnerability to climate
change. From 1980-2020 Lesotho was impacted by 22 shocks, 90 percent of which were climatic, and there is an
expected increase in frequency of intense precipitation events leading to heightened risk of flooding, increased aridity,
temperatures, and drought.49 Lesotho is deemed highly vulnerable and ranked 127 out of the 181 countries on the
2020 ND-GAIN Index, which calculates a country’s vulnerability to climate change. The more vulnerable a country is
the lower their score on the ND-GAIN Index. Lesotho’s score declined from 43.9 to 41.4 between 1995 and 2018,
indicating increasing vulnerability (Figure 2.1). According to data from EM-Dat and the Think Hazard databases,
Lesotho has high risk exposure to droughts, river flooding and wildfires. Since 2019, Lesotho has experienced all three
natural disasters, with national states of disaster declared for drought in 2019 and floods in 2021.
2. In the last six years, Lesotho has been adversely affected by both droughts and floods When looking at the annual SPEI
drought index, in all scenarios of future climate mitigation50, the drought index will worsen (Figure 2.2).
Figure 2.1: ND-GAIN Index for Lesotho, 1995-2018
49 Climate Change Knowledge Portal, World Bank.
50 A world of sustainability-focused growth and equality (SSP1); a “middle of the road” world where trends broadly follow their historical
patterns (SSP2); a fragmented world of “resurgent nationalism” (SSP3); a world of ever-increasing inequality (SSP4); and a world of rapid
and unconstrained growth in economic output and energy use (SSP5).
Page 80 of 81
Figure 2.2: Projected Climatology/ of Annual SPEI
Drought Index for 2040-2059 (Annual)
Lesotho; (Ref. Period: 1995-2014), SSP2-4.5
3. These shocks undermine the country’s goal of turning the private sector into an engine of growth. Climatic shocks
will result in crop damage, hunger, wildfires and disease outbreaks which are expected to adversely affect ‘working
days’, impacting businesses.51 The agricultural sector is predominantly rain-fed, leaving it acutely exposed to these
shocks. During the 2020-2021 period, Lesotho declared two states of emergencies for shocks (COVID-19 and heavy
rains) that severely impacted businesses primarily due to damage to infrastructure disrupting trade logistics.
Additionally, the horticulture sector is adversely affected by temperature changes, especially extreme heat, which ca
damage plants and adversely affect the health of livestock. Crops have specific temperature windows for optimal
growth and yield. Lesotho’s maximum temperatures are expected to increase throughout the year.52
4. Strengthening Lesotho’s adaptive capacity to climate change is a core part of its Second Nationally Determined
Contributions (NDC), which was finalized in 2017. Lesotho is focused on implementing adaption mechanisms to
improve and diversify livelihoods in view of current and future climate risks. Climate change strategies are integrated
in the country’s development strategies in support of plans to eliminate poverty and eradicate inequality. Aligned with
Lesotho’s NDC, by setting aside public funds, governments can strengthen their climate adaptation mechanisms and
provide timely support to MSMEs when a shock occurs. While the Ministry of Finance (MOF) does maintain a
contingency fund for unforeseen expenditures, these funds tend to be deployed early in the budget cycle (prior to the
occurrence of climatic shocks) leaving no earmarked funds for MSMEs.
5. Strengthening the financial resilience of MSMEs is also critical to managing the physical risks that emanate from
climate change. The physical risks of climate change pose a threat to Lesotho’s financial sector due to vulnerability to
an increase in non-performing loans. When looking at domestic credit to the private sector, or the financial resources
provided to the private sector by financial corporations, Lesotho sits at 21.5 percent – a sharp increase from 5.2
percent in 2004. Financial support to MSMEs can ensure they have the liquidity needed to withstand shocks and
reduce the financial sector’s exposure to climatic shocks.53
51 EM-DAT: The Emergency Events Database – Universite catholique de Louvain (UCL) - CRED, D. Guha-Sapir, Brussels, Belgium. and
UNHCR (2018). Lesotho Flash Update 01 – Hailstorms and Flash floods (period: March 1 2018–March 31 2018).
52 Lesotho Climate Risk Country Profile, World Bank
53 Analysis by the European Central Bank shows that the average default probability of the credit portfolios of the 10% of Euro area banks
that are most vulnerable to climate change could rise 30% by 2050.
Page 81 of 81