<<<PDF_PAGE_1>>>
AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
FINAL PUBLICATION INFORMATION
Microeconomic Consequences and Macroeconomic Causes
of Foreign Direct Investment in Southern African Economies
The definitive version of the text was subsequently published in
Applied Economics, 45(25), 2012-10-26
Published by Taylor and Francis
THE FINAL PUBLISHED VERSION OF THIS ARTICLE
IS AVAILABLE ON THE PUBLISHER’S PLATFORM
This Author Accepted Manuscript is copyrighted by the World Bank and published by Taylor and Francis. It is
posted here by agreement between them. Changes resulting from the publishing process—such as editing, corrections,
structural formatting, and other quality control mechanisms—may not be reflected in this version of the text.
You may download, copy, and distribute this Author Accepted Manuscript for noncommercial purposes. Your license
is limited by the following restrictions:
(1) You may use this Author Accepted Manuscript for noncommercial purposes only under a CC BY-NC-ND
3.0 Unported license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/.
(2) The integrity of the work and identification of the author, copyright owner, and publisher must be preserved
in any copy.
(3) You must attribute this Author Accepted Manuscript in the following format: This is an Author Accepted
Manuscript of an Article by Lederman, Daniel; Mengistae, Taye; Xu, Lixin Colin Microeconomic
Consequences and Macroeconomic Causes of Foreign Direct Investment in Southern African Economies ©
World Bank, published in the Applied Economics45(25) 2012-10-26 http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc-nd/3.0/
© 2013 The World Bank
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
<<<PDF_PAGE_2>>>
Microeconomic Consequences and Macroeconomic Causes of Foreign
Direct Investment in Southern African Economies1
Daniel Lederman
Taye Mengistae
Lixin Colin Xu
World Bank
September 4, 2012
Abstract. The authors use a new data set on firms in thirteen countries of the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) and comparators from other regions to
identify the benefits and determinants of FDI in this region. FDI has facilitated local
development in the SADC. Foreign owned firms perform better than domestic firms, are
larger, and locate in richer and better-governed countries, and in countries with more
competitive financial intermediaries. They are also more likely to export than domestic
firms and evidence suggests that they might have positive spillover effects on domestic
firms. Based on a standard empirical model, the SADC is attracting the inward FDI per
capita the region’s level of income would predict. But this means that there are less
capital inflows per capita to the region than there are to wealthier parts of the developing
world. Moreover, the SADC is attracting less FDI than comparators for reasons that are
possibly more fundamental than current income, namely, countries’ past growth record,
demographic structure and the quality of physical infrastructure. Interestingly, inward
FDI is less sensitive to variation in income within the SADC than in other parts of the
world, but is more responsive to changes in country’s openness to trade.
Key words: FDI, spillovers, firm performance, exports, Africa, SADC.
1 We thank Robert Cull and Justin Lin for helpful comments, and Randall Morck and Bernard Yeung for t
insights from related research. We are grateful to Naguib Lallmahomed for some excellent background o
advice. The paper is a product of background research done for a report on business environment issues in :
trade and market integration in the SADC prepared by the financial and private sector department of the
Africa Region Vice Presidency of the World Bank. The views expressed here are those of the authors’ and
do not implicate the World Bank, its executive directors, or the countries that they represent.
1
<<<PDF_PAGE_3>>>
1. Introduction
This article offers empirical evidence on the microeconomic consequences and
macroeconomic causes of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in the Southern African
Development Community (SADC, hereafter), which is a regional economic community
of 13 member states of a combined population of 250 million.2 Would countries in the
region grow faster if there were more FDI than is the case presently? Is the region
attracting as much foreign capital as it would be expected given the region’s
macroeconomic performance? If it is not, what could be the reasons for it? These
questions cannot be answered by referring to current literature. This article addresses
these questions with analyses of the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys, a global cross
country dataset that combines observations on the performance of firms with information
on their ownership and overall business environment, and macroeconomic data.
A common hypothesis about the determinants and consequences of FDI inflows is
that FDI can reduce income gaps between developing and advanced economies. In the
neoclassical world of perfect factor mobility and technology transfer, capital readily
flows from rich to poor countries, seeking higher returns in capital-scarce economies.
However, we do not always see this in actual data, some of which actually suggest that
hopes that FDI inflows are a “supply side remedy” to catapult poor countries into the fast
track of development, as prescribed by the United Nations (1999), could be too optimistic.
This observation applies to the data being analyzed in this paper. Even though the
average income of SADC countries is lower than the average of all countries covered by
our data, per capita FDI inflows to the SADC region are only 36.6 U.S. dollars (in 2000
prices) per annum whereas the average for all other countries is 202.8 dollars. SADC
countries are also attracting less FDI than other countries with comparable incomes, for
which FDI inflows per capita average 63.2 dollars. This positive (and counter intuitive)
association between per capita income and net FDI inflows is also evident within the
SADC, where cross country gaps in flows are large. Within the SADC, annual per capita
FDI inflows are less than 10 dollars among the low-income countries, but range between
2 The members are: Angola, Botswana, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi,
Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, the Seychelles, South Africa, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.
2
<<<PDF_PAGE_4>>>
50 and 167 dollars per capita among the middle income countries of Angola, Botswana
and South Africa.3
Turning to the consequences of FDI, another common hypothesis is that FDI can
foster local economic development either because it relaxes capital constraints to growth
or because it facilitates the transfer of new technology or knowhow. However, it is also
plausible that foreign-owned companies merely capture rents, crowd out domestic
investment, and do not provide technological spillovers for domestic firms. Even if FDI
does facilitate local growth by relaxing capital constraints or through technology transfer
or spillovers, the magnitude of these benefits would be hard to identify a priori in any
setting, because they could vary across countries. For example, the benefits may depend
on the market size of the host country and the time-horizon of the commitments involved
in the investment. This combination of high hopes and unclear evidence puts empirical
research in center stage. Thus, it is useful to investigate empirically whether FDI plays a
positive role in SADC, and if so, how. Many also presume that the FDI inflow levels to
the region are too low. How much is too little? What factors can explain the observed
FDI inflows?
On the question of the role of FDI in the SADC, our data suggest that this is likely
to have been one of facilitating growth in the region. In the data, foreign owned firms
grow faster on average than domestic firms. Also, foreign owned firms are, on average,
more productive, larger, and more likely to export. Furthermore, there is some evidence
that domestic firms perform better in the presence of foreign owned firms than they do
otherwise. At the same time, foreign owned firms are more likely to locate in richer and
better-governed countries, and countries that have more competitive financial industries.
To assess the determinants of inward FDI to the region, we use an accepted
empirical model described in Fan et al. (2009) in which FDI per capita is a function of
market size, infrastructure, education, exchange rates, the quality of institutions, and past
economic performance (as measured by the mean and variability of growth). The data
are broadly consistent with the predictions of the model. However, market size appears to
3 It is worth noting that there is a similar if not more pronounced variation in FDI inflow per capita among
regions within China (Wang, Xu and Zhu 2012).
3
<<<PDF_PAGE_5>>>
be a weaker determinant of FDI in the SADC than in other countries, while openness to
trade is more important than in the other countries.4
The next section presents our firm-level evidence on the consequences of FDI.
Section three examines the macroeconomic determinants of FDI inflows with panel data.
Section four concludes.
2. Micro Consequences of Foreign Ownership in SADC
If FDI supports economic development, its direct effects should show up in the
growth and productivity of firms benefitting from foreign capital investment, or at least
on some other indicator of performance, such as export orientation. In addition, FDI can
have indirect effects on the economic performance of other domestic firms through
spillover effects, as mentioned above. The mechanism by which FDI boosts productivity
and growth of recipient firms could be that it addresses or relaxes the capital shortages
and financial constraints that limit the scale of domestic firms. To the extent that this is
true, part of the productivity advantage of foreign owned firms should come from their
operating on a larger scale than domestic firms. A related but distinct source of the
potential productivity advantage of foreign owned firms is that they often have better
access to new technology or can afford to engage in R& D investment. If true, FDI could
influence the growth and productivity of the domestic industry by becoming sources of
learning spillovers for domestic firms.
To investigate the effects of FDI through these microeconomic channels, we
analyze the correlation between the foreign ownership of firms and the performance of
SADC firms in terms of sales growth and total factor productivity. The literature has not
produced a consensus on the effect of foreign ownership on productivity (Caves, 1999).
4
The result relating to openness is consistent with the view that FDI tends to be more export oriented in
smaller countries. Our conclusion here does not necessarily contradict that of Asiedu (2002), which shows
that the behavior of FDI to Sub-Saharan Africa differs from that in other regions. We focus here on the
southern African countries (SADC), which attracts relatively more FDI than the rest of Sub-Saharan Africa .
Moreover, Asiedu (2002) does not control for cross country differences in economic performance.
4
<<<PDF_PAGE_6>>>
Although some papers have found significant productivity gaps between foreign-owned
and domestic firms, others have reported that this correlation largely disappears after
controlling for differences in the quality of inputs. Examples of studies that have found
significant productivity premiums for foreign owned firms are Konings (2001), Yasar and
Paul (2007), Hallward-Driemeier, Wallsten and Xu (2006), Xu, Zhu and Lin ( 2005) and
Zhang, Zhang and Zhao (2001).
Data
The data set we use to investigate the relationship between foreign ownership and firm
performance in this paper comes from the Enterprise Surveys that the World Bank has
carried out over the past decade in more than 100 countries. The surveys take a snapshot
of a range of indicators of various aspects of a country's business environment, including
access to finance and business services, physical and institutional infrastructure, the
quality of governance and control of corruption, and information on variables needed to
calculate productivity, including revenue from sales and other sources, as well as various
expenses. To date, at least one wave of the survey has been conducted in all countries of
the SADC except the Seychelles and Zimbabwe, with some countries having had two
waves. The member countries covered by the data are: Angola (two waves), Botswana
(two waves), Democratic Republic of Congo, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius,
Mozambique, Namibia (two waves), South Africa, Swaziland (two waves), Tanzania
(two waves), and Zambia. For each wave and each country, the number of firms in the
sample ranges from 75 (Lesotho) to 1057 (second wave of South Africa). Each sample
was selected through a stratified random sampling scheme from a sample frame drawn
from official listings of the universe of firms for each country. While the timing of the
surveys differs across countries, all were carried out between 2005 and 2009.
Table 1 lists the variables used in the firm-level regressions. Table 2 provides
descriptive statistics of those variables for the SADC and highlights the differences in
sample between foreign owned and domestic firms. A foreign owned firm is one in
5
<<<PDF_PAGE_7>>>
which a foreign entity has some ownership share.5 A contrast worth noting is that foreign
owned firms are significantly larger--the median foreign firm in SADC is 70 log points
(or 100 percent) larger than domestic firms. The share of foreign owned firms in the
overall sample is also larger in richer countries. Surprisingly, host countries tend to have
higher firing costs. A possible explanation is that, in response to opening up to foreign
ownership, countries impose higher firing costs to respond to populist demands.
Unsurprisingly, foreign firms tend to be located in countries with more competitive banks,
which are characterized by lower interest spreads (i.e., the discrepancy between lending
and borrowing rates at banks). Similarly, foreign firms tend to be located in countries
exhibiting higher indices of government efficiency (by ICRG). Foreign firms tend to
suffer lower losses of sales due to crimes.
Our measure of productivity, total factor productivity (TFP hereafter), was
estimated from industry-specific translog production functions. 6 Table 2 suggests that
foreign owned firms in the SADC are typically more productive than domestic firms. For
example, the median TFP of foreign firms is higher by 5 log points. A foreign owned
firm is also more likely to be an exporter than a domestic firm (21 versus 8 percent). In
terms of sales growth,7 the median growth rate is slightly lower for foreign owned firms
than for domestic firms (7.8 versus 9.3 percent), but this reflects the fact the median
foreign owned firm is larger than the median domestic firm. That is, the median domestic
firm grows faster than the median foreign owned firm because of dynamic economies of
scale or learning by doing, but foreign owned firms could grow faster if they were to
have the same initial size.
Firm performance and foreign ownership: productivity and growth
In order to identify the sources of the correlation between foreign ownership,
productivity and growth of firms, we estimated the following model:
5 An alternative definition would be to deem a firm foreign only if foreign entities hold a minimum of
ownership share such as 51 percent (or majority) share or some lower threshold. However, it turns out that
the quantitative results remain very similar with this alternative definition.
6 As a sensitivity check, we also estimate Cobb-Douglas TFP, which is less general than the translog
specification. The results are qualitatively very similar.
7 Three years of sales are reported in the data.
6
<<<PDF_PAGE_8>>>
Y  FRN F Z e (1)
ic ic ic c ic
where i refers to a firm, and c refers to a country. Y is either TFP or sales growth. FRN
is foreign ownership. The variable set F consists of firm level controls, and includes the
share of ownership by the largest shareholder, the age of the firm (in logarithm), and the
share of losses of sales due to crime.8 The variable set Z consists of country level
controls, and include lagged GDP per capita, the ICRG index of government efficiency,
the firing costs in terms of years of salary, and the interest spread (as a measure of
banking competitiveness). All the country-level variables come from the World
Development Indicators of the World Bank. Estimations of models with micro and
macro units of analysis are known to lead to potential biases in precision, which we
addressed by clustering the standard errors at the country level (Moulton 1986).
We report two sets of results, one set with, and the other without, including South
Africa in the sample, because South Africa is larger and richer than other African
economies. Table 3 reports the results. Since the results without South Africa tend to be
very similar, we focus on the first two columns.
The most important finding is that foreign ownership has a strong and significant
relationship with both sales growth and TFP. Increasing foreign ownership by 10
percentage points would increase sales growth by 2 percentage points, and TFP by 1.4
percentage points. To put this in perspective, Table A1 in the appendix compares SADC
with the East Asia and Pacific region (consisting of China, Indonesia, Malaysia, and
Thailand, EAP hereafter) and all non-SADC countries with similar income level as
SADC members.9 Foreign ownership is significantly higher in SADC (17.5 percent) than
in EAP (13.5 percent) and the similar-income sample (10.8 percent). In light of the
positive effect of foreign ownership and SADC's advantage in this measure, foreign
ownership has reduced the disadvantage of SADC toward other regions.
8 We also estimated specifications including the share of losses of sales due to power outages and the
average level of schooling of firm employees. The results including these additional controls are similar to
the results obtained in the basic specification. However, several countries do not have these indicators. To
preserve as many SADC countries as possible in our sample, we opted to report the results without them.
9 That is, with income less than South Africa’s 4600 U.S. dollars of 2000.
7
<<<PDF_PAGE_9>>>
The other findings on performance determinants are also illuminating. The
intensity of crime (as measured by the share of sales lost to crimes) is positively
associated with sales growth but negatively with TFP. Firms in countries with higher
income levels tend to have higher TFP--a country that is richer by 100 log points tends to
have a productivity premium of 7.5 percent, which could reflect the forces of a large
market or better infrastructure. Unsurprisingly, high firing cost and, thus, a high exit costs,
are associated with lower productivity. An interpretation is that firing costs cause
shirking by workers and, therefore, reduce the efficiency of a fixed amount of capital and
labor. This is consistent with what is commonly found in many developing countries (Xu
2011). Another noteworthy finding is that both sales growth and TFP are negatively
affected by high bank interest spreads. Our interpretation is that when banks are less
competitive--with a higher interest spread--firms cannot expand as much because capital
costs are too high or because it is more difficult to find alternative sources of finance.
Similarly, high interest spreads distort capital-labor ratios and, therefore, reduce
productivity. Interestingly, countries with higher government efficiency levels are
associated with a higher sales growth rates but lower productivity levels. Finally, larger
firms tend to grow faster in SADC.
Foreign ownership and exporting status
Exporting may be particularly important for SADC and other small African economies.
Exports also signal stronger competitiveness in the region. Thus, one way to gauge the
benefits of foreign ownership is to examine whether it also helps firms to export. In
general, one expects foreign ownership to facilitate exports because foreign firms tend to
have better technologies, management know-how, besides possessing better information
on exporting opportunities. On the other hand, foreign owners could enter the local
market seeking profits in the domestic market. They may also set up operations in host
countries to circumvent import tariffs. To investigate this issue, we thus report the
following linear probability model:
Export Frn F Z 
ic ic ic c ic
8
<<<PDF_PAGE_10>>>
where Export is a dummy variable for exporting firms. Subscripts i and c indicate firm
and country. Frn is foreign ownership, F are firm characteristics, and Z are country
characteristics. We also experimented with probit and logit specifications, and the results
were similar. We report the linear probability model because the coefficients are easier
to interpret.10 Again, standard errors are clustered at the country level. The results are in
Table 4. Again, the results with and without including South Africa are quite similar, and
we focus on the first column results which include South Africa.
Relative to a domestic firm, the probability of exporting for a foreign firm is
higher by almost 6 percentage points. This effect is quite large since the average
probability of exporting for domestic firms is only 7.7 percent. Only a few other
determinants of exporting status have statistically significant coefficients. Large firms,
not surprisingly, tend to export. Interestingly, firms featuring a higher share of ownership
by the largest owner (e.g., a proxy of family ownership) are less likely to export.
Are there Spillover Effects of FDI?
Potentially important benefits from FDI are spillovers on domestic firms in terms of
transfers of technologies, managerial know-how, and competition effects. These
spillover effects can be either horizontal or vertical. Horizontal spillovers refer to the
effects of the presence of foreign-owned firms on domestic firms within the same
industry (or specializing in the same product). There are two counteracting effects
related to horizontal spillovers: (a) the positive aspects such as technological spillovers,
personnel movements, transfer of managerial know-how, and the cultivation of more
efficient local input suppliers; and (b) the negative aspects associated with foreign firms
being competitors of domestic firms, taking away market shares, increasing the average
fixed costs, thus reducing the productivity of domestic firms. The positive horizontal
effects could be limited by foreign firms’ incentives to restrict the flow of commercial
secrets to domestic firms, for example, via intellectual property rights and paying for
efficiency wages to reduce personnel departures. Indeed, recent studies find
insignificant and even negative horizontal spillover effects—sometimes dubbed the
10 Further controlling for employee schooling and the share of losses due to power shortages does not
change our results but reduce the sample significantly.
9
<<<PDF_PAGE_11>>>
“market-stealing” effect; see Haddad and Harrison (1993) on Morocco, Aitken and
Harrison (1999) on Venezuela, Djankov and Hoekman (2000) on the Czech Republic,
and Konings (2001) on Bulgaria, Romania and Poland. The evidence on positive
horizontal spillovers appears to be more prominent in developed countries, such as the
United Kingdom and the United Sates (Haskel et al. 2002; Keller and Yeaple 2003).
However, Kee (2010) finds positive horizontal FDI spillover effects through local input
suppliers used by foreign and domestic garment firms in Bangladesh.
Vertical spillover effects refer to the potential benefits for input suppliers or clients of
foreign companies, such as by offering technological help, stronger quality control, and
so on. Since there are no conflicts of interests between foreign firms, their clients and
input suppliers related to technology and know-how, positive vertical spillover effects are
more plausible than positive horizontal spillovers. This is indeed what is found in
Javorcik (2004) for Lithuania. Thus, it is safe to say that the evidence on spillovers is
mixed. In surveying related evidence, Rodrik (1999) stated that “today’s policy literature
is filled with extravagant claims about positive spillover effects from FDI but the
evidence is sobering.” Our understanding of spillover effects is further complicated by
the idea that the effects of policies tend to differ across contexts due to differences in
complementary institutions, regulatory environments, and even skill levels of local
employees, which probably shape the nature of inter-firm spillovers (Kremer 1993;
Hausman, Rodrik and Velasco 2005; Xu 2011).
The data only allowed us to identify spillover effects within broad industry
categories. We first computed country-industry-level average foreign ownership,
weighted by the share of employment in the industry (FRN ). We then estimated the
c, j
productivity model with the sample of domestic firms only, but added FRN as an
c, j
additional regressor. A positive coefficient indicates positive spillovers.11 Note that we
do not interpret the results as pure horizontal spillovers. The industry category in our
data is at the two-digit level. The spillovers effect is thus a mixture of both horizontal
and vertical spillovers effects. That is, in addition to horizontal spillovers, our broad
externality measure also captures the vertical spillovers of, say, downstream foreign-
11 We dropped firms in industries with fewer than five domestic firms.
10
<<<PDF_PAGE_12>>>
owned firms specializing in apparel on upstream domestic firms specializing in yarns or
textiles.
The results, in Table 5, show a robust and positive spillover effect from foreign-
owned firms. When South Africa is included, FRN has a positive and significant
c, j
coefficient of around 0.23. The magnitude is nontrivial: increasing average foreign
ownership by 10 percentage points would increase domestic firms’ productivity in the
same industry by 2 percentage points. Thus, besides the direct effect of raising average
productivity, foreign-owned firms also seem to enhance the productivity of domestic
firms within broad industries. The results, however, strongly hinges on whether South
Africa is excluded, in which case, it remains positive, but its magnitude drops to 0.14,
and it becomes statistically insignificant (with a t-statistic of 1.51). Thus, the FDI
spillover effect is stronger in South Africa than in the smaller southern African countries.
3. SADC's FDI inflows per capita in international perspective
Foreign ownership seems to play a positive role in SADC.12 In this section we
examine the relative performance of SADC countries in attracting FDI, as measured by
FDI inflow per capita. In particular, what are the key determinants of FDI? What may
explain the differences between SADC countries and comparison groups (such as other
countries with similar income levels)? We proceed in several steps. First, we lay out a
simple theoretical framework for the key determinants of FDI across countries. Second,
we explain our empirical framework and key variables. Finally, we present the results
from cross-country regressions on FDI.
A Simple Theoretical Framework
The literature on FDI points towards a relatively simple generic empirical specification
(Fan et al., 2009). The literature views prospective multinational firms as possessing
12 See also Ahmed, Cheng and Messinis (2011), which find that FDI has significant impacts on growth in
Sub-Saharan Africa.
11
<<<PDF_PAGE_13>>>
information-based firm-specific capabilities that they could profitably apply in foreign
countries. Indeed, these capabilities allow them to overcome the “difficulties of being
foreign” to generate returns to justify the investment (Morck and Yeung 1991, 1992).
Agency problems, information asymmetries, and property rights protection problems that
render information-based assets inalienable prevent these firms from selling or leasing
those capabilities to foreign firms. To profitably apply their unique capabilities abroad,
multinationals resort to establishing controlled foreign operations and engage in FDI.
Still, FDI is an investment like any other in the sense that it aims to capture positive net
present values.
The net present value of a corporate investment project depends on a number of
factors. The first is the size of an economy (Caves 1999). With a larger economy,
investment projects with high fixed cost components yield higher net present values due
to a larger extent of domestic market that allows the firm to reduce the average cost of the
product. All else equal, FDI inflows should rise with the size of the host economy. The
net present value a firm sees also depends on local product and factor market
development and growth potential. It depends negatively on market risks and the costs of
doing business. The latter is perhaps more important and contributing factors include
high taxes, high wages relative to productivity, and poor infrastructure.13
All these factors hinge on an economy’s institutional environment. If local
commercial disputes are adjudicated through transparent and predictable norms or
through established legal and political institutions, the disadvantage of being foreign
diminishes and FDI flows in. This consideration echoes the finance and growth literature,
which emphasizes that sound and well-enforced rules and regulations, like property rights
protection and information disclosure, encourage economic development in general and
capital market development in particular (La Porta et al. 1997 and 1998; King and Levine
13 Coughlin, Terza, and Arromdee (1991) provide empirical support for these factors influencing inward
FDI, though they do not consider financial development. Froot and Stein (1991), while showing that
undervalued host country currencies attract inward FDI, also stress the barriers firms confront in raising
capital to finance new investment projects. These barriers are particularly daunting for domestic firms in
economies with underdeveloped capital markets. In such countries, foreign firms could have an advantage
in capturing the NPVs of new investment projects because of their access to better functioning foreign
capital markets (Foley, Mahir, and Hines, 2004).
12
<<<PDF_PAGE_14>>>
1993). The reason is that these rules and regulations constrain opportunistic behavior and
build transactional trust between parties (North 1991). Indeed, governments that are less
corrupt, have more efficient bureaucracies, and those that impose less burdensome
regulations foster economic development (La Porta et al. 1998) and attract FDI (Alfaro et
al. 2005, Globerman and Shapiro 2002).
In summary, FDI is attracted by basic economic and institutional factors. The
economic factors include the size of the market, the current level of development, and
variables such as education and infrastructure development that affect productivity and
expected future development. Obviously, other considerations like trade openness and
the host country’s currency (see, e.g., Froot and Stein 1991) also may affect FDI. The
institutional factors are proxied by general indicators of “good government” such as the
establishment of law and order as well as high quality government bureaucracy.
The empirical relationship
Our dependent variable is the logarithm of per capita FDI inflows in constant US dollars
of 2000, winsorized at the tail 5 percent.14 We added a constant to the FDI observations
because some countries have negative FDI inflows (negative FDI inflow represents
repatriation of previous investment). Although dropping the negative FDI inflow
observations leads to qualitatively similar results, we do not see a good reason to exclude
them.
Our objectives are twofold. First, we want to empirically investigate the
correlates of FDI. Second, we want to assess if the determinants of FDI flowing into
SADC are similar to those of the FDI flowing into other countries. To these ends, we
follow the discussion in the previous section and regress each country’s FDI inflows on a
set of country characteristics associated with the quality of government, along with some
basic measures of the level of development and other country characteristics such as
14 The winsorization is done to prevent the influence of outliers and measurement errors. This variable is
highly skewed. The qualitative results are similar when we winsorize at the 1 or 5 percent levels. However,
giving the winsorization threshold is around 0 at 5 percent level, the interpretation of magnitude is a lot
easier--log(FDI per capita + constant) is close to log(FDI per capita) when the constant is 1.4 instead of
around 92, and log point is close to percentage point in interpretation.
13
<<<PDF_PAGE_15>>>
population size, demographic characteristics and trade policies. We include the SADC
dummy in these regressions and then ask whether SADC’s FDI inflows behave.
We proxy general institutional quality by a commonly-used indicator of the
general quality of government: the rule of law index from ICRG. Rule of law is an ICRG
survey result gauging the state of law and order in each country. It ranges from 1 to 6,
with higher values connoting greater general respect for the rule of law.15 It contains a
law component, which captures the strength and impartiality of the legal and political
establishment in judicial matters, and an order component, which captures the extent to
which residents of a country accept established legal and political institutions as the
solely legitimate way to make and implement laws and to adjudicate disputes.
In place of the ICRG corruption index we alternatively use the control of
corruption index. This indicator is most commonly used in the related economics
literature. This variable is meant to capture the extent to which illegal payments are
expected throughout various levels of government. In addition to being consistent with
previous studies, the data has a broad international coverage.16 The index itself takes on
values ranging from zero (most corrupt) to six (least corrupt).
Macroeconomic performance. Macroeconomic performance plays an interesting
role. FDI is large if foreign corporate investors regard a location’s investment
opportunities highly. Obviously, investment opportunities are more abundant in locations
with better macroeconomic performance, due perhaps partly to better institutions, where
government officials are not corrupt, bureaucracies are efficient, and the rule of law is
generally upheld. At the same time, positive shocks on investment opportunities often
entice governments seeking to attract foreign capital to provide these institutions.17
Hence, a simple relationship between measures of government quality and foreign direct
investment could be misleading. At the very least, to sort this out, our empirical
15 ICRG data has the advantage of covering the majority of countries from 1982 on. For details, see Knack
and Rahman (2007).
16 We also considered other indexes such as those from Kaufman-Kraay-Mastruzzi (2010). However, these
data start in 1996, which would reduce the estimation sample significantly.
17 See Easterly et al. (1993), which shows that temporal shocks rather than good policies often lead to
positive growth.
14
<<<PDF_PAGE_16>>>
investigation should incorporate proxies for the presence of profitable investment
opportunities. These are:
Growth trend is a country’s per capita GDP growth rate averaged over the
previous five years. We interpret a high past growth rate as both indicative of profitable
investment opportunities and a track record of the country’s government fostering, or at
least not impeding, their exploitation.
Macro volatility is the standard deviation of per capita GDP growth over the prior
five years. More unstable economic growth, all else equal, is likely less conducive to
FDI, and less indicative of sound and predictable government policies.
General development is measured by the following variables: the log of per
capita GDP in 2000 constant US dollars at PPP; education, measured by the log of the
average years of schooling completed by the country’s adult population; infrastructure
quality, represented by telephones per 1000 residents; and the level of urbanization,18
which is the share of urban in total population. These are a set of variables commonly
used in the literature (see Coughlin et al. 1991).
Following the discussion in the previous section, we incorporate other country
characteristics that can be expected to affect FDI. We include country size, measured as
the log of total population, to control for scale, as well as the the availability of adult
labor force, as measured by the adult share of the population.19
We include each country’s currency exchange rate relative to the US dollar, all
normalized by the rate in 2000. This means that a higher value of exchange rate implies
a more depreciated local currency. Countries with undervalued currencies, all else equal,
appear to attract more FDI (e.g., see, Froot and Stein, 1991).
In sensitivity check we also include a measure of openness (i.e., imports plus
exports divided by GDP) for two reasons. Being open to international trade reduces the
18 We have also tried including the percent of GDP accounted by manufacturing and services, and found
that they don't matter for attracting FDI after controlling for GDP per capita, urbanization, and other
controls.
19 Adults are defined to be between the age of 15 and 64.
15
<<<PDF_PAGE_17>>>
need for trade-barrier jumping FDI. The variable is lagged by one period to avoid
contemporaneous endogeneity bias.
The SADC dummy. To assess whether FDI inflows to SADC are “exceptional”
compared to other countries with similar income levels, we include a SADC dummy
variable in the regression.
The specification of our empirical analysis is therefore the following:
Ln(FDIPC )  SADCX 'TRACK INST  (1)
it 0 SADC it it it it
where X represents variables related to general development and other characteristics,
including log GDP per capita, log(mean years of schooling), telephone density, the urban
share of population, the adult share of population, log population, exchange rate, and
openness; TRACK includes the growth trend and its volatility in the past five years; INST
are the institutional measures represented by Rule of Law or control of corruption.20
Since many of the explanatory variables, especially the institutional variables, tend to be
stable over time, using fixed effects would exacerbate the influence of measurement
problems (Griliches and Hausman, 1986), and thus we present OLS estimates. Because
the errors are likely to be correlated within countries, we allow clustering of the error
term at the country level (Moulton, 1986).
Summary Statistics
Table 6 reports the differences in key variables between the SADC region and the two
comparison groups for the 2001 to 2006 period, namely, non-SADC countries and non-
SADC countries with similar income levels. The latter group drops country-year
observations with incomes exceeding the highest income level for the countries within
the SADC region. The SADC region has an average growth rate in real GDP per capita
20
There are some missing observations for rule of law, corruption, and schooling. Since dropping all
missing observations for these variables would entail a significant loss of sample, we imputed these
variables with basic country indicators such as GDP per capita and the urbanization share; we then also
include missing indicators for the three vairables to capture potential mis-imputation. We reach similar
conclusions about our key results if we drop the sample with imputed missing observations for the three
variables.
16
<<<PDF_PAGE_18>>>
of 2.3 percent, lower than the non-SADC group (3.1 percent) and the similar-income
sample (3.1 percent) by 0.8 percentage points. The average GDP per capita is around
1300 U.S. dollars, slightly higher than the similar-income sample, and much lower than
the non-SADC sample. Per capital FDI is 36.6 U.S. dollars (in 2000 value), about 18
percent of the average for the non-SADC sample (202.8 dollars), and 58 percent of the
similar-income sample (63.2 dollars). The two proxies of institutions, the rule of law
index and the control of corruption index, are similar between SADC and the similar-
income sample, but slightly lower than the non-SADC sample. Thus, it appears that
SADC lags slightly behind in attracting FDI inflows relative to similar-income countries
and further behind when compared with the non-SADC sample. Moreover, it seems that
the institutional disadvantage is negligible; key disadvantages for SADC seem to be its
lower growth rate and its lower income level to the extent that these factors are important.
Results
Table 7 reports the results. The pooled-sample results appear in the first three columns,
and the similar-income sample results are reported in the next two columns. The
institutional variable is the rule of law in Column (1), and the control-of-corruption index
in Column (2). Column (3) adds "trade/GDP lagged" as an additional control to test the
robustness of our results. The structure of the last two columns with the similar-income
subsample is similar, but for the sake of brevity we do not report the results using the
control-of-corruption index as an alternative institutional measure.21
The alternative measures of institutions yield similar results (see columns (2) and
(3)). In addition, adding lagged trade/GDP does not change our main results. However,
since trade/GDP can be affected by FDI, it is potentially endogenous. Thus, we leave it
out of our base specification. But for readers who are concerned that a major omitted
variable might be openness, our main results are unaffected by its inclusion. Finally, the
main results from the similar-income sample are also similar to those of the pooled
sample.
21 The results are very similar and are available upon request.
17
<<<PDF_PAGE_19>>>
We thus focus on Column (1). Good macroeconomic performance track records
attract FDI. The average growth in the previous five years appears with a positive and
significant coefficient while growth volatility has the opposite sign (though statistically
insignificant). The general government quality, the rule of law variable, does not directly
affect FDI. Growth expectations, therefore, are the most important determinant of FDI.
Measures of economic fundamentals matter a great deal. Schooling, though
statistically insignificant, has the expected sign. Phone density is significant, indicating
that FDI tends to flow to countries with better infrastructure. Similarly, FDI tends to
flow to richer countries, due perhaps to better protection of property rights, market sizes
and so on. Another important variable is the share of adult labor force in total population,
which has the expected positive sign and is highly significant. This is potentially
worrisome for SADC because the region has a higher share of dependents than other
regions. Interestingly, countries with a smaller population tend to have higher FDI per
capita—perhaps the benefits of FDI (such as through bringing export opportunities) are
higher for smaller countries, which face a tighter constraint of small domestic markets.
The SADC dummy is not statistically significant. This means that once we
control for the observed variables, the region on average does not lag behind other
countries in attracting FDI per capita. It appears that SADC’s relatively low FDI is
therefore a consequence of relative under-performance in terms of the observed
explanatory variables.
A more general test of the SADC effect is to allow SADC to interact with the
other explanatory variables. It turns out that only the interaction terms with phone
density, income level, and openness are close to being statistically significant. Thus, we
report a specification in Table 8 in which the SADC dummy variable is interacted with
these three variables. The coefficients of the non-interacting variables remain largely the
same as those reported in Table 7. The SADC dummy variable still is statistically
insignificant. The three interaction terms, SADC GPD per capita, SADC openness,
and SADC phone density are all statistically significant. For SADC, phone density is
not important for attracting FDI. Neither is the income level, which makes sense because
18
<<<PDF_PAGE_20>>>
for the relatively small SADC countries, market size (partially captured by the level of
income) is not important because FDI probably tends to be export-oriented, a tendency
confirmed by our earlier firm-level analysis. Finally, openness is much more important,
with a coefficient that is twice that of the rest of the world. Again, our interpretation is
that for small countries, openness increases the expected value of FDI as openness
facilitates exports. In other words, there is a stronger complementarity of openness and
FDI for SADC.
What Explains the SADC Disadvantage in FDI?
To shed light on how the key variables explain the relatively low FDI per capita of SADC,
we choose two comparison groups: the East-Asia Pacific countries (EAP, consisting of
China, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand), and the similar-income sample (consisting of
all countries in our sample that have the same range of income per capita as the SADC).
While our choice of the similar-income sample is easy to understand, we chose EAP to
explain the gap between SADC and the front-runners among the developing countries.
The results are contained in Table 9.
The first comparison concerns SADC versus EAP. The difference in the
dependent variable is 1.08 in favor of EAP. The percent of this difference explained by
variable X is calculated as 100*(EX EX )/Y , where ,EX ,Y are
k k k,EAP k,SADC k k,R
the estimated coefficients (with the specification under the first column of Table 7
without the SADC dummy), the mean X for region R, and the difference in the outcome,
k
respectively. The higher adult share of population in EAP explains 43 percent of the
observed difference. The higher previous growth rate explains a further 32 percent.
EAP’s advantage in phone density explains another 24 percent. The income level
advantage of EAP adds 16 percent, and a better schooling becomes the last (somewhat)
important factor, explaining about 9 percent.22 Country sizes, which is negatively
correlated with FDI, actually help SADC countries since they tend to be smaller.
22 The sum of the shares of the contribution of reported explanatory variables need not add to 100 percent
because we do not report the shares that are explained by other variables, and because SADC and the
comparator countries do not constitute the full sample of the regression.
19
<<<PDF_PAGE_21>>>
The second comparison is between SADC and countries with similar income.
The comparison group has an advantage in the dependent variable of 0.41. The most
important variables for explaining this difference are phone density (43 percent of the
difference), the adult share of population (39 percent), the income level (23 percent), and
previous growth rates (7 percent).
4. Conclusions
At the beginning we asked three questions about FDI in SADC: Have FDI inflows
played a positive role in SADC economies? Are SADC countries attracting too little FDI?
What can be done to attract more FDI to this region? The answer to the first question is
yes. We found evidence that FDI helped southern African economies. Foreign firms
tend to be larger, export more, have higher productivity and sales growth rates; the
presence of these firms thus raises the average firm performance and creates jobs for host
countries. Moreover, domestic firms in the same industry tend to benefit from a stronger
presence of foreign firms.
Regarding the second question, we found that FDI flows to countries with good
macroeconomic performance, as indicated by stable high growth in the past and good
economic fundamentals (i.e., phone density, the adult share of population, and income
level). Usual suspects – corruption or the rule of law – do not appear to significantly
affect FDI. Importantly, we did not find that SADC's ability to attract foreign direct
investment is exceptional: the SADC dummy is never statistically different from zero.
There may be some differences between SADC and the rest of the world in FDI behavior,
however: the income level appears less important, while openness to international trade is
particularly important.
The comparisons with other regions suggest that SADC has lower FDI per capita
due to poorer economic fundamental (previous growth rates, lower income level, phone
density, and the adult share of the population). The accounting exercise raises another
question: Why do SADC countries have worse economic fundamentals? This is beyond
20
<<<PDF_PAGE_22>>>
the scope of this paper. But there are plenty of analyses shedding light on this question.
Some of the potential culprits include ethnic polarization (Easterly and Levine, 1997),
political instability and civil wars (Collier and Gunning 1999), among others. The key
for attracting FDI in SADC would be to build a fundamentally sound economy that
naturally lures FDI. In addition, the results indicate that openness is especially important
for SADC. Policies and procedures to encourage openness would therefore be especially
important for the region.
21
<<<PDF_PAGE_23>>>
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James Robinson, 2005. “Institutions as the Fundamental
Cause of Long-run Growth,” NBER wp 10481, the Handbook of Economic Growth,
Elsevier, North-Holland.
Aitken, Brian J., Ann E. Harrison. 1999. “Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Direct Foreign
Investment? Evidence from Venezuela.” American Economic Review 89， 605-18.
Ahmed, AD, E.J. Cheng, G. Messinis. “The role of exports, FDI and imports in development:
evidence from Sub-Saharan African countries,” Applied Economics 43, 3719-3731.
Asiedu, Elizabeth. 2006. “Foreign Direct Investment in Africa: The Role of Government Policy,
Institutions and Political Instability,” World Economy, 29 (1), 63-77.
Asiedu, Elizabeth. 2002. “On the Determinants of Foreign Direct Investment to Developing
Countries: Is Africa Different?” World Development, 2002, 30 (1), 107-119.
Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych, 2005. “Why doesn’t capital
flow from rich to poor countries? An Empirical investigation,” NBER WP 11901.
Calderon, Cesar, Luis Serven. 2008. "Infrastructure and Economic Development in Sub-Saharan
Africa," World Bank Working Paper 4712, Washington, D.C.
Caves, Richard, 1971, “International Corporations: the Industrial Economics of Foreign
Investment,” Economica, Vol. 38, (Feb), pp. 1-27.
Caves, Richard. 1999. Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Cambridge Press.
Collier, P., and JW Gunning. 1999. “Explaining African Economic Performance.” Journal of
Economic Literature 37(1), 64-111.
Coughlin, Cletus C., Joseph V. Terza, and Vachira Arromdee, 1991. "State Characteristics and
the Location of Foreign Direct investment within the U. S.," Review of Economics and
Statistics, Vol. 73, p. 675 – 683.
Devarajan, Shantayanan, William Easterly, and Howard Pack. "Low Investment Is Not the
Constraint on African Development," Economic Development and Cultural Change,
51(3), 547-71.
Djankov, Simeon, and Bernard Hoekman. 2000. “Foreign Investment and Productivity Growth in
Czech Enterprises.” World Bank Economic Review 14, 49-64.
Durnev, Artyom, and E Han Kim, 2005, “To Steal or Not to Steal: Firm Attributes, Legal
Environment, and Valuation,” Journal of Finance, Vol.60, No.3 , June 2005, 1461-1493
Easterly, William, M. Kremer, L. Pritchett, L. Summers. 1993. “Good policy or good luck?
Country Growth Performance and Temporary Shocks.” Journal of Monetary Economics
32, 459-483.
Easterly, William, Ross Levine. 1997. "Africa's Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Divisions,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4), 1203-1250.
22
<<<PDF_PAGE_24>>>
Fan, Joseph, Randall Morck, Bernard Yeung, Lixin Colin Xu. 2009. "Institutions and Foreign
Direct Investment: China vs. the Rest of the World", World Development 37 (4), pp. 852-
865.
Foley, C. Fritz, Mihir A. Desai, and James R. Hines Jr. 2004. "A Multinational Perspective on
Capital Structure Choice and Internal Capital Markets." Journal of Finance, 59, no. 6
(December 2004): 2451-2488.
Foroutan, Faezeh, Lant Pritchett. “Intra-Sub-Saharan African Trade: Is It Too Little,” World
Bank wokring paper.
Froot, Kenneth A. and Jeremy C. Stein, (1991) "Exchange Rates and Foreign Direct Investment
and Imperfect Capital Market Approach," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Nov, p. 1191
– 1217.
Globerman, Steven, and Daniel Shapiro, 2002, “Global Foreign Direct Investment Flows: the
Role of Governance Infrastructure,” Industry Canada.
Griliches, Zvi, and Jerry Hausman. 1986. "Errors in Variables in Panel data" Journal of
Econometrics 31(1), pp. 93-118.
Haddad, Mona, and Ann E. Harrison. 1993. “Are There Positive Spillovers from Direct Foreign
Investment? Evidence from Panel Data for Morocco.” Journal of Developing Economics
42, 51-74.
Hallward-Driemeier, Mary, Scott Wallsten, Lixin Colin Xu. "Ownership, Investment Climate and
Firm Performance," Economics of Transition 14(4), 629-47.
Haskel, Janathan; Sonia Pereira, and Mathew Slaughter. 2002. “Does Inward Foreign Direct
Investment Boost the Productivity of Domestic Firms?” NBER working paper No. 8724.
Kaufman, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi. 2010. “The Worldwide Governance
Indicators: Methodology and Analytical Issues.” World Bank Policy Research Working
Paper No. 5430.
Keller, Wolfgang, and Stephen Yeaple. 2003. “Multinational Enterprises, International Trade and
Productivity Growth: Firm Level Evidence from the United States.” NBER working
paper No. 9504.
Konings, J. 2001. "The Effects of Foreign Direct Investment on Domestic Firms: Evidence from
Firm-Level Panel Data in Emerging Countries," Economics of Transition 9(3), 619-33.
Hanson, Gordon, Matthew Slaughter, and Raymond Mataloni, 2001, "Expansion Strategies of
U.S. Multinational Firms," in Dani Rodrik and Susan Collins, eds., Brookings Trade
Forum 2001, 2001: 245-282.
Hausman, R., Dani Rodrik, Andres Velasco. 2005. “Growth Diagnostics.” in J. Stiglitz and N.
Serra, eds., The Washington Consensus Reconsidered: Towards a New Global
Governance, Oxford University Press, New York.
Javorcik, Beata. 2004. “Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of Domestic
Firms? In Search of Spillovers through Backward Linkages,” American Economic
Review 94, 605-27.
Kee, Hiau Looi. 2010. “Uncovering Horizontal Spillovers: When Foreign and Domestic Firms
Share Common Local Input Supplier.” Working paper, World Bank, Washington, D.C.
23
<<<PDF_PAGE_25>>>
King, Robert G and Ross Levine. 1993. “Finance, Entrepreneurship, and Growth: Theory and
Evidence,” Journal of Monetary Economics 32:3, pp. 513-42.
Knack, Stephen; Rahman, Aminur. 2007. "Donor Fragmentation and Bureaucratic Quality in Aid
Recipients," Journal of Development Economics 83(1), 176-97.
Kremer, Michael. 1993. “The O-Ring Theory of Economic Development.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 108, 551-575.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny. 1997. “Legal
Determinants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance 52:3, pp. 1131-50.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1998. “Law
and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy. 106:6, pp. 1113-55.
Lin, Justin Yifu. 2009. Economic Development and Transition: Thought, Strategy, and Viability.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Markusen, J.R. 2001. Multinational Firms and the Theory of International Trade. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Morck, Randall and Bernard Yeung (1992) “Internalization: An Event Study Test,” Journal of
International Economics, Vol. 33, (August), p. 41-56.
Morck, Randall and Bernard Yeung (1991) “Why Investors Value Multinationality,” Journal of
Business, 64(2): 165-87.
Moulton, Brent. 1986. "Random group effects and the precision of regression estimates," Journal
of Econometrics 32, 385-397.
North, Douglass C. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance,
Cambridge University Press, New York.
Rankin, Neil, Mans Soderbom. 2006. "Exporting from Manufacturing Firms in Sub-Saharan
Africa," Journal of African Economies 15(4), 671-87.
Rodrik, Dani. 1999. “The New Global Economy and Developing Countries: Making Openness
Work.” Overseas Development Council (Baltimore, MC) Policy Essay No. 24.
Rogoff, Kenneth, Carmen M. Reinhard. 2002. “FDI to Africa: The Role of Price Stability and
Currency Instability,” (with Carmen M. Reinhart), in Boris Pleskovic and Nicholas Stern
(eds.), Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics 2002: The New
Reform Agenda, (Washington, DC: World Bank/Oxford University Press), 247-82
United Nations. 1999. Foreign Direct Invesmtent in Africa: Performance and Potential. Geneva.
Wheeler, David, and Ashoka Mody (1992), “International investment location decisions,”Journal
of International Economics, 33, pp. 57-76.
Wang, Xiaozu, Lixin Colin Xu, Tian Zhu. 2012. “Foreign Direct Investment under a Weak Rule
of Law: Theory and Evidence from China.” Economics of Transition 20(3), July, 401-424,
Lead article.
Xu, Lixin Colin, Tian Zhu, Yi-Min Lin. 2005. "Politician Control, Agency Problems and
Owership Reform: Evidence from China," Economics of Transition 13(1), 1-24.
24
<<<PDF_PAGE_26>>>
Xu, Lixin Colin. 2011. "The Effects of Business Environments on Development: A Survey of
New Firm-Level Evidence,” World Bank Research Observer 26 (2), 310-340, August.
World Bank. 2009. World Development Report: Reshaping Economic Geography. The World
Bank, Washington, D.C.
Yasar, Mahmut, Catherine J. Morrison Paul. 2007. "International Linkages and Productivity at the
Plant Level: Foreign Direct Investment, Exports, Imports and Licensing," Journal of
International Economics 71(2), 373-88.
Zhang, AM, YM Zhang, R Zhao. 2001. "Impact of Ownership and Competition on the
Productivity of Chinese Enterprises," Journal of Comparative Economics 29(2), 327-46.
25
<<<PDF_PAGE_27>>>
Table 1. Definitions of variables in firm-level analysis
Variable Definitions
FRN Share of foreign ownership
largest owner Ownership shares by the largest shareholder.
ln(firm age) The logarithm of firm age.
Loss_crime The share of losses in sales due to crime.
Ln(GDPpc) Ln(GDP per capita of the country)
Firing_cost Firing costs in terms of weeks of wages, from WDI.
Interest_spread Interest spread, from WDI.
Govt_efficiency Government effectiveness index, from ICRG.
Control_CR Control of corruption, from ICRG.
26
<<<PDF_PAGE_28>>>
Table 2. Firm-level summary statistics for the SADC region as a whole
Foreign firms Domestic firms
mean p50 sd mean p50 sd
Ln(L) 3.395 3.091 1.619 2.530 2.398 1.333
Ln(GDPpc) 7.013 7.230 1.201 6.852 6.951 1.181
Firing_cost 61.230 53.200 41.204 53.537 32.000 41.339
Interest_spead 10.583 7.587 10.571 12.157 8.720 12.880
Govt_efficiency -0.176 -0.306 0.746 -0.273 -0.334 0.754
Sales growth 0.405 0.078 1.370 0.285 0.093 1.008
TFPtran 0.091 0.023 0.581 0.001 -0.030 0.492
Exporter 0.207 0.000 0.406 0.077 0.000 0.267
FRN 0.834 1.000 0.264 0.000 0.000 0.000
Largest owner 0.711 0.700 0.245 0.839 1.000 0.241
Ln(firm age) 2.139 2.079 0.984 2.036 1.946 0.968
Loss_crime 0.012 0.000 0.038 0.021 0.000 0.514
27
<<<PDF_PAGE_29>>>
Table 3. Effects of foreign ownership: SADC sample
All SADC countries Excluding South Africa
sales growth TFPtran sales growth TFPtran
coef/se coef/se coef/se coef/se
foreign ownership 0.200** 0.141*** 0.151* 0.097**
(0.081) (0.048) (0.084) (0.045)
largest owner 0.174** 0.029 0.215** 0.037
(0.075) (0.026) (0.085) (0.032)
ln(firm age) -0.168*** -0.018 -0.190*** -0.016
(0.049) (0.012) (0.050) (0.014)
loss_crime 0.039*** -0.022*** 0.040*** -0.021***
(0.003) (0.002) (0.003) (0.001)
ln(GDPpc) -0.218*** 0.075** -0.199*** 0.085**
(0.053) (0.036) (0.045) (0.036)
Firing_cost -0.001* -0.002*** -0.002*** -0.002***
(0.001) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
interest spread -0.015*** -0.004*** -0.015*** -0.004***
(0.003) (0.001) (0.003) (0.002)
government effectiveness 0.169* -0.124* 0.217** -0.082
(0.101) (0.064) (0.093) (0.062)
lnS 0.041 0.065***
(0.025) (0.023)
industry dummies yes no yes no
Number of observations 3,842 2,929 3,186 2,299
Adjusted R2 0.094 0.066 0.105 0.078
standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the country level.
*, ** and ***: statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels.
28
<<<PDF_PAGE_30>>>
Table 4. Exporting and Foreign ownership:
The SADC sample
All SADC countries Excluding South Africa
exporter exporter
coef/se coef/se
foreign 0.055*** 0.050***
(0.021) (0.019)
largest owner -0.061*** -0.050**
(0.024) (0.023)
ln(firm age) 0.012 0.005
(0.009) (0.006)
loss_crime 0.000 0.000
(0.001) (0.001)
Lgdppc 0.000 0.002
(0.016) (0.018)
Firing_cost -0.000 -0.000
(0.000) (0.000)
interest spread -0.001 -0.001
(0.001) (0.001)
government effectiveness -0.008 0.000
(0.021) (0.024)
lnS 0.037*** 0.038***
(0.004) (0.005)
industry dummies yes yes
Number of observations 6,248 5,368
Adjusted R2 0.189 0.197
standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the country level.
*, ** and ***: statistical significance at the 10, 5 and 1 percent levels.
29
<<<PDF_PAGE_31>>>
Table 5. Effects of foreign ownership on productivity of SADC domestic firms
All SADC countries Excluding South Africa
TFPtran TFPtran TFPtran TFPtran
coef/se coef/se coef/se coef/se
largest owner 0.070** 0.066** 0.091*** 0.090***
(0.028) (0.026) (0.028) (0.027)
ln(firm age) -0.021 -0.023 -0.018 -0.019
(0.014) (0.015) (0.016) (0.016)
loss_crime -0.021*** -0.022*** -0.021*** -0.021***
(0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)
ln(GDPpc) 0.094*** 0.081*** 0.107*** 0.099***
(0.026) (0.029) (0.028) (0.027)
firing_cost -0.002*** -0.002*** -0.002*** -0.002***
(0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000)
interest spread -0.003*** -0.003** -0.003*** -0.003**
(0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)
government effectiveness -0.148*** -0.130* -0.079 -0.065
(0.057) (0.067) (0.057) (0.058)
industry-level employment-weighted 0.232*** 0.139
average foreign ownership (0.082) (0.092)
Number of observations 2,210 2,210 1,669 1,669
Adjusted R2 0.066 0.062 0.087 0.086
Note. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the country level.
***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.
The sample consists of domestic firms in SADC countries..
30
<<<PDF_PAGE_32>>>
Table 6. Summary Statistics for SADC and Comparator countries:
2001-2006 average.
Non-SADC:
SADC Non-SADC
similar income countries
Mean Mean Mean
Real growth rate of GDP per capita 2.261 3.128 3.102
GDP per capital, USD real 1,289.358 7,248.203 1,229.144
FDI per capita 36.599 202.808 63.167
FDI/GDP 0.037 0.068 0.041
Rulelaw 0.991 1.181 0.946
Control_CR 0.651 0.834 0.661
31
<<<PDF_PAGE_33>>>
Table 7. Is the SADC region different?
The dependent variable is ln(FDI per capita + constant)
Pooled Sample Similar-Income Sample
coef/se coef/se coef/se coef/se coef/se
ln(schooling ) 0.198 0.200 0.138 0.218 0.065
t-1
(0.170) (0.166) (0.177) (0.169) (0.175)
ln(phone density ) 0.243** 0.231** 0.261** 0.159 0.121
t-1
(0.116) (0.111) (0.114) (0.110) (0.106)
the adult share of population 4.391** 4.456** 2.505 4.914** 3.621*
t-1
(2.103) (2.086) (2.097) (2.080) (2.000)
urban share 0.334 0.348 0.145 0.378 0.456
t-1
(0.614) (0.610) (0.616) (0.653) (0.642)
Ln(population) -0.123* -0.124** -0.009 -0.177*** -0.047
(0.063) (0.063) (0.068) (0.061) (0.064)
Relative exchange rate -0.002* -0.002 -0.002** 0.003 0.001
t-1
(0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.008) (0.009)
Ln(GDPpc ) 0.275* 0.268* 0.326** 0.300* 0.376**
t-1
(0.148) (0.149) (0.151) (0.159) (0.156)
Mean GDPpc growth 0.075*** 0.074*** 0.072*** 0.069*** 0.068***
in the previous 5 yrs (0.015) (0.015) (0.013) (0.015) (0.014)
S.D. GDPpc growth -0.890 -0.860 -1.304* -0.693 -1.071
in the previous 5 yrs (0.714) (0.706) (0.738) (0.680) (0.715)
Rulelaw 0.025 0.036 0.018 0.014
t-1
(0.056) (0.055) (0.057) (0.058)
Control of Corruption 0.064
t-1
(0.070)
Trade/GDP 0.702*** 0.960***
t-1
(0.160) (0.195)
SADC dummy 0.018 -0.011 -0.117 0.049 -0.085
(0.305) (0.306) (0.286) (0.287) (0.255)
Number of observations 3,265 3,265 3,187 2,311 2,269
Adjusted R2 0.442 0.443 0.455 0.376 0.409
Note. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.
Standard errors clustered at the country level.
The constant in the dependent variable is 1.4.
32
<<<PDF_PAGE_34>>>
Table 8. Is SADC Different? Another Look
The dependent variable is ln(FDI per capita + constant)
ln(schooling ) 0.109
t-1
(0.631)
ln(phone density ) 0.308***
t-1
(2.711)
the adult share of population 2.560
t-1
(1.263)
urban share 0.091
t-1
(0.148)
Ln(population) -0.015
(-0.228)
Relative exchange rate -0.002*
t-1
(-1.743)
Ln(GDPpc ) 0.329**
t-1
(2.149)
Mean GDPpc growth in the previous 5 yrs 0.077***
(5.839)
S.D. GDPpc growth in the previous 5 yrs -1.388*
(-1.862)
Rulelaw 0.018
t-1
(0.341)
Trade/GDP 0.639***
t-1
(3.924)
SADC 1.928
(1.347)
SADC * ln(phone density ) -0.293*
t-1
(-1.791)
SADC * Ln(GDPpc ) -0.386*
t-1
(-1.696)
SADC * Trade/GDP 0.683*
t-1
(1.939)
Number of observations 3,187
Adjusted R2 0.464
Note: ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent levels.
Standard errors clustered at the country level.
The constant in the dependent variable is 1.4.
33
<<<PDF_PAGE_35>>>
Table 9. Accounting for the log FDI per capita outcome
Mean for = 1.08
Co eff SDDC EAP (EX EX )/Y
k EAP SADC
Independent variables: 2.09 3.17
Share of adult population 4.37 0.53 0.64 42.58
t-1
Mean real GDPpc growth rate in the
previous five years 0.08 0.59 5.17 31.81
ln(phone density ) 0.24 0.42 1.50 24.23
t-1
ln(GDPpc )
t-1 0.27 6.41 7.05 16.35
ln(schooling) 0.20 1.10 1.60 9.33
urban 0.33 0.31 0.37 2.08
t-1
S.D. of real GDPpc growth rate in the
previous five years -0.89 0.07 0.06 1.32
rulelaw 0.03 2.62 3.14 1.22
t-1
Relative exchange rate 0.00 2.71 0.69 0.32
t-1
ln(population) -0.12 1.91 4.83 -33.30
similar income
SDDC countries:
mean 2.09 mean 2.50 = 0.41
ln(phone density ) 0.24 0.42 1.15 43.04
t-1
Share of adult population 4.37 0.53 0.57 38.51
t-1
ln(GDPpc )
t-1 0.27 6.41 6.75 22.66
urban 0.33 0.31 0.43 9.64
t-1
Mean real GDPpc growth rate in the
previous five years 0.08 0.59 0.98 7.09
ln(population) -0.12 1.91 1.66 7.58
ln(schooling) 0.20 1.10 1.18 3.86
Relative exchange rate 0.00 2.71 0.69 0.84
t-1
S.D. of real GDPpc growth rate in the
previous five years -0.89 0.07 0.08 -2.53
rulelaw 0.03 2.62 2.46 -1.01
t-1
Notes: The results for other variables are not reported. The coefficients are based on the same
specification in Column (1) of Table 7--except that we do not control for SADC dummy here, since it is not
statistically significant.
34
<<<PDF_PAGE_36>>>
The Appendix
Table A.1. Mean Characteristics for SADC, EAP and the similar-income sample
mean mean mean
SADC EAP Similar income as SADC
Foreign 0.175 0.135 0.108
Largest owner 0.813 0.678 0.753
ln(firm age) 2.058 2.354 2.324
Loss_crime 0.020 0.004 0.012
ln(GDPpc) 6.886 7.247 6.937
Fire_cost 55.152 88.344 64.715
interest_spread 11.822 3.542 9.335
govt_efficiency -0.253 0.052 -0.275
ln(sales) 4.856 8.288 6.361
Note. “Similar income as SADC” means income less than 4600 USD (in 2000 value)
35