<<<PDF_PAGE_1>>>
Document of
The World Bank Group
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Report No. 112944-STP
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
AND MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY
PERFORMANCE AND LEARNING REVIEW
OF THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
FOR
SÃO TOMÉ AND PRÍNCIPE
FOR THE PERIOD FY14-FY18
May 1, 2019
Central Africa Country Department 1
Africa Region
The International Finance Corporation
Sub-Saharan Africa Department
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank Group authorization.
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
<<<PDF_PAGE_2>>>
Date of the last Country Partnership Strategy is May 28, 2014
FISCAL YEAR
January 1 to December 31
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
As of February 28, 2019 (average BCSTP rate)
US$1.00= SÃO TOMÉ AND PRÍNCIPE Dobras [21.62]
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
ADI Independent Democratic Action Party
AF Additional Financing
AFAP Agencia Fiduciária de Administracão de Projectos (Implementing Agency)
AfDB African Development Bank
AGER Autoridade Geral de Regulação (Regulation Authority)
ASA Advisory Services and Analytics
BISTP Banco Internacional de São Tomé e Príncipe (International Bank of STP)
CAB Central African Backbone
CPF Country Partnership Framework
CPI Consumer Price Index
CPS Country Partnership Strategy
DGTH Directorate General of Tourism and Hospitality
DP Development Partner
DPO Development Policy Operation
DSA Debt Sustainability Analysis
EC European Commission
ECF Extended Credit Facility
EIB European Investment Bank
EITI Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
EMAE National Electricity Company
EU European Union
FSDIP Financial Sector Development Implementation Plan
FY Fiscal Year
GBV Gender-based Violence
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GEF Global Environment Facility
GIME ` Groups of Interest in Road Maintenance
GNI Gross National Income
GoSTP Government of São Tomé and Príncipe
GPE Global Partnership for Education
GRM Grievance and Redress Mechanisms
HIV/AIDS Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
IBRD International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICT Information and Communication Technologies
IDA International Development Association
IFC International Finance Corporation
IMF International Monetary Fund
IPF Investment Project Financing
MDGs Millennium Development Goals
ii
<<<PDF_PAGE_3>>>
MFD Maximize Financing for Development
MICS Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey
MIGA Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
NDC Nationally Determined Contributions
PFM Public Financial Management
PPIAF Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility
PPP Public Private Partnership
PRC People’s Republic of China
PRSP II Second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
SCD Systematic Country Diagnostic
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals
SME Small and Medium Size Enterprise
SOE State Owned Enterprise
SP Social Protection
SSA Sub-Saharan Africa
STP São Tomé and Príncipe
TA Technical Assistance
TFs Trust Funds
UN United Nations
UNDP United Nations Development Program
UNICEF United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund
WACA West Africa Coastal Areas Resilience Project
WBG World Bank Group
WHO World Health Organization
IDA IFC MIGA
Vice President: Hafez Ghanem Sergio Pimenta Keiko Honda (EVP)
Director: Elisabeth Huybens Aliou Maiga Merli Baroudi
Task Team Leaders: Barbara Geiser Mehita Sylla Moritz N. Nebe
Acknowledgements
The PLR was prepared under the guidance of Elisabeth Huybens, Country Director (AFCC1). In addition to the task team leaders
(TTL), the core team included Clara de Sousa, Country Manager (AFMAO); Angelique DePlaa, Country Program Coordinator
(AFCC1); Hoda Mustafa, Head, (MIGAF); Issa Diaw, Mazen Bouri and Carine Clert, (Program Leaders, AFCC1); Olivier
Godron, Country Program Coordinator (AFCC1); Ana Maria Carvalho, Senior Operations Officer (AFMAO); Elena Palei
(MIGOP); and Maria Margarida Mendes, Executive Assistant (AFMAO). Several World Bank Group country team members
based in Luanda, Washington D.C., and other locations made significant contributions including Rafael Chelles Barroso, Senior
Economist (GMFDR); Eric Zapatero Larrio, Senior Social Protection Specialist (GSP07); Emily Gardner, Senior Education
Specialist (GED13); Alvin Etang Ndip, Senior Economist (GPV01); Antonio Chamuco, Senior Procurement Specialist
(GGO07); Joao Tinga, Sr. Financial Management Specialist (GGO13); Zenaida Hernandez Uriz, Senior Private Sector Specialist
(GFCAC); Monique Courchesne, T&C/IFC Lead (CAFW4); Penelope Fidas, Senior Private Sector Development Specialist
(GTC13); Nicolas Jean Marie Sans, Senior Hydropower Specialist (GEE07); Noroarisoa Rabefaniraka, Senior Transport
Specialist (GTI07); Julian Casal, Senior Financial Sector Economist (GFM01); Domingas Pegado, Program Assistant
(AFMAO); Tambi Matambo, Senior Environmental Specialist (GCCRA); Firmin Nkoghe, Country Program Assistant
(AFCCM); Dean Thompson, Enand Iris Ollila and Marcela Natalicchio, Micheline Agbo Epse Faucompré, Consultants
(AFCC1).
iii
<<<PDF_PAGE_4>>>
Table of Contents
1. INTRODUCTION................................................................................................. 5
2. MAIN CHANGES IN COUNTRY CONTEXT ................................................. 6
A. Changes in poverty reduction and shared prosperity .................................... 6
B. Changes in key macroeconomic and debt developments ............................. 7
C. Political developments .................................................................................. 9
3. SUMMARY OF PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION ....................................... 9
A. Program and portfolio performance .............................................................. 9
B. Evolution of stakeholders and partnerships ................................................ 12
C. Progress towards 2014-2018 CPS Outcomes ............................................. 12
4. EMERGING LESSONS ..................................................................................... 17
5. ADJUSTMENTS TO The COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY ........ 18
Theme One: Supporting Macroeconomic Stability and Inclusive Growth ........... 22
Theme Two: Strengthening Human Capacity and Reducing Vulnerability ......... 24
6. RISKS TO REVISED CPS PROGRAM .......................................................... 26
Figures
Figure 1: Progress Towards Achieving CPS Outcomes .............................................. 16
Tables
Table 1: STP Social Indicators (value and year of measurement) ............................... 7
Table 2: STP Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, 2014-2019 ..................................... 8
Table 3: World Bank Financing Program in STP (FY14-Q3FY19) .......................... 11
Table 4: PLR Indicative CPS Financing Plans, FY19-FY20 ...................................... 19
Table 5: Expected ASA, FY19-20 .................................................................................. 20
Table 6: STP Revised Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool (SORT) ................. 27
Annexes
Annex 1: Updated Results Matrix ................................................................................. 28
Annex 2: Changes to original CPS Results Matrix ...................................................... 38
Annex 3: Progress toward FY14-18 CPS Outcomes .................................................... 47
Annex 4: Planned and Actual Deliveries of Non-Lending Services (FY14-18) ......... 53
Annex 5: World Bank Group Support to the Energy Sector in STP ......................... 54
Annex 6: World Bank Group Support to the Financial Sector in STP ..................... 56
Annex 7: Select Financial Soundness Indicators.......................................................... 57
Annex 8: Improving Business Regulation in São Tomé and Príncipe ....................... 58
Annex 9: Evolution of Partnerships in São Tomé and Príncipe ................................. 60
Annex 10: Map of São Tomé and Príncipe 61
iv
<<<PDF_PAGE_5>>>
THE REPUBLIC OF SÃO TOMÉ AND PRÍNCIPE
PERFORMANCE AND LEARNING REVIEW
OF
THE FY14-FY18 COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
1. INTRODUCTION
1. The Board of Executive Directors discussed the FY14-FY18 Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS) for São Tomé and Príncipe (STP) on July 3, 2014 (Report No. 83144). The
CPS supported STP’s Second Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP II, 2012-2016), which
aimed to maintain macroeconomic stability, diversification, and promote private sector-led
growth. The CPS was structured around two themes: (1) supporting macroeconomic stability and
national competitiveness; and (2) reducing vulnerability and strengthening human capacity.
Gender, partnerships, and capacity building were elements cutting across all the proposed
engagements, as were the promotion of inclusive private sector-led growth while maintaining
macroeconomic stability.
2. STP’s economic outlook has improved relative to the beginning of the CPS period,
but remoteness, small size, and insularity constrain the opportunities for inclusive growth.
Real gross domestic product (GDP) growth has been hovering around 4 percent during the CPS
period and is expected to remain at the same level in the medium term. Inflation has decreased,
and external accounts have improved since 2015 due to lower oil prices and growing agricultural
and tourism exports. Fiscal policy is the Achilles heel of economic policy, characterized by low
domestic revenue mobilization, poor public financial management, aid dependency, and debt
distress. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) program in place through most of the CPS period
has helped maintain macroeconomic stability, but progress towards the program objectives was
mixed. Tourism and agriculture are the main drivers of growth, and bottlenecks in transport,
electricity, relevant skills, and the financial system need to be addressed for faster, job-creating
growth.
3. Following the October 2018 Parliamentary elections, a new Government was installed
on December 3, 2018. Two coalition parties (Movement for the Liberation of STP-Social
Democratic Party and Democratic Convergent Party/Force for Change Democratic
Movement/Democratic Union for Citizenship and Development) lead the coalition government.
The two main objectives of the new Government are to considerably increase the average growth
rate and to reinforce social cohesion.
4. Delivery of the CPS program has been broadly satisfactory, despite some challenges.
With an IDA17 allocation of about US$15 million for three years, the implementation of the CPS
program sought to further enhance selectivity. Several operations were dropped. While this
detracted from progress on a few CPS outcomes, notably in building private sector capacity and
5
<<<PDF_PAGE_6>>>
improving skills, it also contributed eventually to improved performance, thanks to a strengthened
dialogue, greater complementarity and collaboration with other development partners (DPs),
impactful deployment of trust funds (TFs), and an increased focus on the performance of the
critically important electricity sector.
5. With a quadrupled IDA18 allocation, this Performance and Learning Review (PLR)
allows for much greater ambition – accelerating progress towards the twin goals and
strengthening focus on climate change resilience – while enhancing selectivity by
consolidating the outcomes pursued. This PLR articulates how the World Bank Group (WBG)
can play a transformational role to enable diversification and growth, build human capital, and –
given STP’s vulnerabilities – promote resilience to climate change. The PLR further articulates
how the CPS program will align with the IDA18 policy package and the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). Foundations are being laid to strengthen private sector investment in line with
Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD) and closer IDA engagement with the International
Finance Corporation (IFC) and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA).
6. The PLR proposes a two-year extension of the FY14-FY18 CPS until the end of FY20.
This PLR is being presented after the closing of the original CPS period, largely due to changing
program preferences under the previous government and subsequently, the transition to the new
government. The proposed extension would allow time to build ownership and trust with the newly
elected government ahead of the development of the forthcoming Country Partnership Framework
(CPF) and allow more time to achieve revised targets under this more ambitious PLR. In addition,
it would allow the CPF to be informed by the Poverty Assessment and the findings of the
Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) to be finalized in early FY20.
2. MAIN CHANGES IN COUNTRY CONTEXT
A. CHANGES IN POVERTY REDUCTION AND SHARED PROSPERITY
7. Estimates based on the 2010 household survey suggest that the poverty rate has fallen
slightly in recent years. Based on a growth-poverty elasticity model, the population living on
less than US$1.90 per day (Purchasing Power Parity) would have declined from 33.9 percent in
2010 to 30.6 percent in 2018. The Poverty Assessment expected to be finalized in late FY19 will
be based on the results from the 2018 national household survey and will provide a much-needed
update on the profile of poverty in STP.
8. STP’s human development outcomes continue to improve. STP had met five
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by 20151 and is on track to achieve the SDGs related to
hunger and nutrition, healthy lives and equitable access to education, improve maternal health,
ensure environmental sustainability and reduce child mortality by 2030. Human development
outcomes for STP are well above the average for Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) and some other
comparator countries (See Table 1). However, the Government is keen to address pending
challenges, especially those related to learning and social vulnerability and it has recently asked to
join the Human Capital Project. STP as such is not yet included in the Human Capital Index
1 These are: Goal 2: Achieve universal primary education; Goal 4: Reduce child mortality; Goal 5: Improve Maternal Health;
Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDs, malaria and other diseases; and Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability.
6
<<<PDF_PAGE_7>>>
because it has not developed internationally comparable data on the quality of education, but the
upcoming Girls Empowerment and Quality Education for All Project (P169222) will tackle this
issue.
Table 1: STP Social Indicators (value and year of measurement)
STP SSA Comoros Cabo Verde Maldives East Timor
Poverty (below US$1.90/day ppp) 33.9 (10) 41.0 (13) 18.1 (13) 8.1 (07) 7.3 (09) 43.5 (07)
Years of schooling (adults)* 5.3 (15) 5.4 (15) 4.8 (17) 4.8 (15) 6.2 (15) 4.4 (15)
Primary completion (%) 82.9 (16) 68.6 (14) 70.9 (13) 102.2 (15) 92.1 (16) 106.1(15)
Progression to secondary (% male) 100.0 (14) 79.6 (13) 100 (13) 97.1 (14) 93.4 (12) 93.8 (14)
Progression to secondary (% 99.4 (14) 77.9 (13) 85.2 (13) 99.4 (14) 100.0 (12) 94.8 (14)
female)
Fertility rate, total births per woman 4.5 (16) 4.8 (16) 4.3 (16) 2.3 (16) 2.1 (16) 5.5 (16)
Youth literacy (% male) 97.4 (15) 76.3 (10) 73.8 (12) 97.6 (15) 100.0 (15) 81.8 (15)
Youth literacy (% female) 97.2 (15) 65.8 (10) 69.6 (12) 98.7 (15) 99.5 (15) 82.7 (15)
Child Mortality under 5 33.8 (16) 78.4 (16) 69 (17) 21.4 (16) 8.5 (16) 49.7 (16)
(per 1000 live births)**
Immunization DTP3 (%)*** 96 (16) 75.8 (15) 91 (17) 96 (16) 99 (16) 85 (16)
Stunting (height for age (% of 17.2 (14) NA 32.1 (12) 21.4 (94) 20.3 (09) 50.2(13)
children under 5)**
Life expectancy at birth 66.4 (15) 59.9 (15) 63.7 (16) 72.4 (15) 77.1 (15) 68.6 (15)
Gross National Income (GNI) per 1,720 (16) 1,516 (16) 1280 (17) 2,970(16) 10,630 (16) 2,060 (16)
capita (Atlas method, current US$)
Source: World Development Indicator (WDI), except *UNDP-Human Development report (latest available data); ** Multiple Indicator Cluster
Survey (MICS) 2014.; and ***World Health Organization (WHO) Global Health Observatory data repository.
B. CHANGES IN KEY MACROECONOMIC AND DEBT DEVELOPMENTS
9. Macroeconomic performance has improved during the period covered by the CPS,
but the economic outlook is less favorable. Growth averaged 4.2 percent p.a. between 2014-
2018. Inflation has come down because of the exchange rate peg with the euro and adequate control
of monetary aggregates by the Central Bank. External imbalances, although large and typical of
small-island economies, declined due to lower oil prices and increased agricultural and tourism
exports.2 The economy’s main growth drivers are government spending, agriculture and tourism.
Tourism has seen growth thanks to higher flight frequency, increased private investments, and the
institution of 15-day visa-free access for nationals of the United States of America (USA), the
European Union (EU), and Portuguese-speaking countries. While STP has been conducting
exploratory oil drilling since 2012, it has not yet produced oil on a commercial basis.3 Further
structural reforms and investments in electricity, transport, Information and Communication
Technologies (ICT), and financial services as well as relevant skills are key to accelerate growth
in agriculture and tourism. Fiscal consolidation will require more domestic revenue mobilization,
while overall government spending is kept on check. Fiscal deficits and the run-down of
international reserves are the main risk for growth going forward.
2 External grant resources mostly finance the external current account deficit.
3 Authorities expect that oil production will start around 2026, but even these projections now seem optimistic given
the prevailing global oil prices and market outlook.
7
<<<PDF_PAGE_8>>>
10. STP faces strong macroeconomic challenges, including fiscal pressures and external
imbalances. Economic growth has been slowing, and is estimated at 2.7 percent in 2018, due to
the reduction in government spending because of a drop in the availability of domestic and foreign
resources, as well as the energy crisis in the second half of 2018, which stemmed in part from
limited resources for operations and maintenance. 4 Fiscal consolidation halted in 2018, and
preliminary data suggest that the domestic primary deficit reached 3.1 percent of GDP. STP is
classified as being in debt distress due to prolonged negotiations on rescheduling external payment
arrears.5 Expansive fiscal policies and lower external inflows drove reserves down to 1.8 months
of imports at end-2018, from 2.9 months of imports at end-2017. The GoSTP has responded by
requesting a new IMF program for an amount of US$19 million, 6 and seeking aid from other
development partners. The Government may also seek to draw on the credit line with the
Government of Portugal. Beyond the reserves crisis, the main challenge for STP is to increase
revenues to balance the budget, which will allow the Government to stop generating arrears, pay
off debt, and finance a larger part of the investments with its own resources.
Table 2: STP Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, 2014-2021
Act ual Estimate/Projections
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
GDP growth (% p.a.) 6.5 3.8 4.2 3.9 2.7 3.0 3.5 4.0
Consumer Price Index 6.4 4.0 5.1 7.7 9.0 5.3 4.9 3.7
(CPI) (end period)
Public revenue, 27.4 28.9 29.3 28.0 23.7 22.9 21.9 22.8
including grants (%
GDP)
Of which, grants 11.8 12.1 14.2 13.5 8.2 8.8 8.5 8.3
Public expenditure (% 32.4 37.3 35.5 33.3 26.8 24.0 21.9 21.6
GDP)
Domestic primary -1.8 -1.7 -2.6 -3.3 -3.1 -1.8 -1.9 -0.5
balance, incl. statistical
discrepancy (% GDP)
Current Account -29.8 -24.8 -20.5 -24.5 -18.9 -18.6 -17.7 -15.0
Balance, excl. official
transfers (% GDP),
PV of external debt (% 30.1 39.7 31.5 26.6 27.1 25.6 24.0 20.9
GDP)
Memo: GDP nominal 335 318 348 373 419 440 476 560
(US$ million)
Source: STP Authorities and World Bank/IMF Staff estimates, 2019.
11. The banking sector has grown, but remains fragile, concentrated and inefficient.
Following rapid growth fueled by the expectation of oil production, vulnerabilities emerged
requiring Central Bank intervention. In January 2015, the third largest bank (with assets equivalent
4 This energy crisis – driven by rising demand and generation capacity shortages resulting from lack of investment
and constrained resources for operations and maintenance - drastically reduced power supply.
5 The latest official World Bank/IMF Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) was completed in July 2018. Because of
this debt classification, STP receives IDA financing on 100 percent grant terms.
6 In March-April 2019, an IMF staff team visited STP for discussions on a new program supported by the Extended
Credit Facility (ECF). The last ECF (approved in July 2015) expired at end-2018. In July 2018, the Executive Board
of the IMF completed the fifth review of the arrangement under the ECF for STP, which was presented to the Board
jointly with the Article IV report. The sixth and last review was not completed because of the interruption after
legislative elections in October 2018.
8
<<<PDF_PAGE_9>>>
to 8 percent of GDP), was placed under government administration for failing to meet minimum
capital requirements. It was sent to liquidation in August 2016, with creditors and depositors
incurring losses. Non-performing loans increased from 15.6 percent in 2011 to 24.9 percent at end
2017 before coming down to 17.0 percent as of September 2018, albeit with significant
provisioning (in excess of 80 percent as of end-2017). Stronger supervision by the Central Bank
is needed to ensure that the financial sector supports growth over the medium term. The World
Bank-supported Financial Sector Development Strategy, adopted by Government in September
2016, is expected to guide this reform.
C. POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS
12. Following the October 7, 2018 Parliamentary elections, a new Government was sworn
in on December 3, 2018. Two coalition parties (Movement for the Liberation of STP-Social
Democratic Party and Democratic Convergent Party/Force for Change Democratic
Movement/Democratic Union for Citizenship and Development), with a combined 28 out of 55
parliamentary seats, formed a coalition government. With 25 seats, the Independent Democratic
Action Party (ADI) which led the previous government, remains the largest party. On November
30, 2018, the President nominated Mr. Jorge Bom Jesus, a member of the largest coalition partner,
as Prime Minister. The new Government submitted its Program to Parliament within the required
30 days and it was approved on December 27, 2018.
3. SUMMARY OF PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION
A. PROGRAM AND PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE
13. Actual IDA financing from FY14 to FY18 was almost three times the level anticipated
in the CPS, which allowed a shift to larger and more transformational WBG support to
selected areas. The country program shifts were made possible by: (i) the quadrupling of the
IDA18 allocation; (ii) the reallocation of IDA resources to STP in the last year of IDA17; and (iii)
the leveraging of the IDA regional window. As a result, during the CPS period, total IDA
commitments significantly scaled up, amounting to US$90.4 million to support Government of
São Tomé and Príncipe (GoSTP) programs7 (See Table 3). This amount includes the Strengthening
Growth and Fiscal Development Policy Operation (DPO) Series, which has completed two out of
three operations (P159010 for US$5 million, and P161707 for US$6 million).
14. As of end March 2019, IDA had an active portfolio of US$79.3 million, comprised of
the following Investment Project Financings (IPF): the Power Sector Recovery Project (P157096,
US$16 million); the Quality Education for All Project (P146877, US$0.9 million, co-financed by
IDA and the Global Partnership for Education (GPE) and its Additional Financing (AF) (P150828,
US$3.5 million); the Institutional Capacity Building Project (P162129, US$12 million); the Social
Protection and Skills Development Project (P163088, US$10 million); and the STP Transport
Sector Development and Coastal Protection Project (P161842, US$29 million) approved by the
Board in March 2019. In addition, STP is benefiting from the West Africa Coastal Areas Resilience
Investment Project (WACA, P162337) co-financed by IDA’s regional integration window
7 Through end Q3, FY19.
9
<<<PDF_PAGE_10>>>
(US$5.3 million), national IDA (US$2.7 million) and the Global Environment Facility (GEF)
(US$1.15 million).
15. The Advisory Services and Analytics (ASA) program was streamlined over the course
of the CPS period (Annex 4). Out of the 16 ASA activities planned, seven were dropped. New
ASA activities were introduced to inform the evolving financing program, including three
activities that directly supported critical reforms to remove bottlenecks to growth such as the
‘Financial Sector Development Implementation Plan’ (FSDIP) (P150418), and the ‘Building
Capacity for the Digitization of the Property Registry in STP’ (P158926). A Tourism Development
Strategy was also delivered under the Investment Climate Reform Program. ASA in areas such as
social protection and skills were consolidated. Finally, areas such as agriculture or procurement
were dropped because the African Development Bank (AfDB) and other DPs had planned ASA
and financing in those areas.
16. IFC’s program combined Advisory and Investment Services. During FY16, IFC
approved a Risk Sharing Facility for Small and Medium Size Enterprises (SMEs) with Banco
Internacional de São Tomé e Príncipe (International Bank of STP, BISTP), the leading bank in
the country with 60 percent of deposits. A commitment of US$1.5 million was made to help BISTP
increase its SME reach and support local entrepreneurs more effectively. Through the Public-
Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF), the IFC also provided initial advisory support on
the development of a transshipment deep seaport, which turned out not to be feasible without an
unsustainable increase in public financing and debt. An IFC Advisory Services project supported
the improvement of the investment climate and tourism development strategy. Due to the
challenges related to its relatively small market size, IFC will leverage Advisory Services and
instruments such as the Private Sector Window to create new opportunities for private sector
development in STP. In line with this, IFC will continue to engage with commercial banks to
improve financial inclusion (digital financial services).
17. MIGA will continue to seek opportunities to de-risk foreign investments in private
sector projects, through its political risk insurance products.
10
<<<PDF_PAGE_11>>>
Table 3: IDA Financing Program in STP (FY14-Q3FY19), US$ Million
Indicative Financing at CPS approval Status as of Q3 of FY19
Planned FY
Project (Ongoing/CPS program) Financing Status Approval Financing
Theme 1: Supporting Macroeconomic Stability and National Competitiveness
3rd Governance and Competitiveness 3.4 Dropped n.a 0.0
DPO (P146953)
STP Economic Governance and 5.0 Dropped n.a 0.0
Competitiveness
1st STP Strengthening Growth and Fiscal 3.5 Closed FY17 5.0
Policy DPO (P159010)
2nd STP Strengthening Growth and 6.0 Closed FY18 6.0
Fiscal Policy DPO (P161707)
Competitiveness and Growth Project 1.0 Dropped n.a 0.0
(P1492620)
Central African Backbone (CAB6) n.a No longer planned n.a 0.0
Project (Regional Integration)
STP Power Sector Recovery Project Addition to Active FY17 16.0
(P157096) CPS
Theme 2: Reducing Vulnerability and Strengthening Human Capacity
IDA and TF: Quality Education for All 2.0 Active FY14 0.9
(P146877)
Quality Education for All AF (P150828) n.a Active FY14 3.5
Institutional Capacity Building Project Addition to Active FY18 12.0
(P162129) CPS
West Africa Coastal Areas Resilience Addition to Active: US$9.15 FY18 8.0
Investment Project (WACA, Regional CPS (National IDA-US$2.7;
Integration) (P162337) Regional IDA-US$5.3;
GEF- US$1.15)
Social Protection and Vulnerability Pilot 1.0 Dropped n.a 0.0
Social Protection and Skills n.a. Active FY19 10.0
Development Project (P163088)
Transport Sector Development and Addition to Active FY19 29.0
Coastal Protection Project (P161842) CPS
TOTAL (US$ million) 90.4
18. As the IDA portfolio has significantly grown in volume, implementation challenges
have emerged. Over the course of the CPS period, US$90.4 million in financing has been
approved for STP, US$79.3 million of which remains in the active portfolio. Early in the CPS
cycle, disbursements ratios were consistently above 20 percent. Predictably, disbursement rates
declined when relatively large projects were added to the portfolio and they are expected to
rebound as the portfolio matures. Implementation of all activities is rated moderately satisfactory
or higher as recorded in the Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISR). Maintaining this
quality with growing volume will require strengthened capacity in technical, fiduciary,
environmental and social areas, and better coordination among the beneficiary sectors, the
Ministry of Finance and the portfolio-wide implementing agency Agência Fiduciária de
Administração de Projectos (AFAP) (Implementing Agency). Extremely limited capacity and
11
<<<PDF_PAGE_12>>>
occasional bottlenecks in information sharing regarding measures taken by the authorities has
caused project delays and the decision to drop DPOs.
19. The World Bank and the GoSTP have been working to strengthen capacity and
portfolio management. The World Bank recently posted its first staff member in STP, a Senior
Procurement Specialist, which has helped strengthen implementation. In addition, with World
Bank support, the Ministry of Finance and Blue Economy has taken a more active role in portfolio
and project management notably through frequent dialogue with the fiduciary and task teams and
regular portfolio reviews. Institutional capacity remains an issue and this will be addressed as a
crosscutting issue through the ‘Institutional Capacity Development Project’ (P162129) and by
strengthening the staffing of the implementation agency, AFAP.
20. Projects completed during the CPS period have yielded satisfactory or higher
outcomes. The Regional CAB2 Project (P117652) had a particularly strong impact, achieving
development objectives highly relevant to STP’s priorities and to the CPS. It introduced
competition and significantly reduced retail prices of internet access. Independent Evaluation
Group (IEG) rated the outcome of the project as highly satisfactory and both World Bank and
Government performance were rated satisfactory. In addition, the project leveraged private funds
and there were no cost overruns. The Second Governance and Competitiveness DPO (P130925)
was rated satisfactory for outcomes and moderately satisfactory for World Bank and government
performance. The project made a significant contribution in improving the comprehensiveness and
public availability of budget data. The Adaptation to Climate Change Project (P111669) was rated
satisfactory both for outcomes and World Bank performance and was succeeded by the WACA
Resilience Project. The IFC–led Sao Tome and Principe Investment Climate Project (594467) was
successfully completed and the project completion report has been submitted through workflow.
Through this project, many business and foreign trade licensing requirements were successfully
eliminated, reducing costs associated to doing business in STP.
B. EVOLUTION OF STAKEHOLDERS AND PARTNERSHIPS
21. The 2015 country survey suggests that there has been a significant improvement in
the attitudes and opinions of stakeholders toward the WBG. The World Bank is highly valued
not just for its financial support, but also for its ability to provide policy advice, capacity building
and mobilization of third-party resources. In addition, respondents were also more positive about
the World Bank’s collaboration with the Government, its responsiveness and openness. However,
more needs to be done to enhance communication with civil society organizations.
22. The WBG ensured close coordination with other DPs to support policy dialogue and
leverage resources for lending engagements and advisory services. An effective collaboration
and coordination between the World Bank, the IMF, the AfDB and the European Commission
(EC) is helping to advance the policy dialogue on macroeconomic, public financial management
(PFM), and structural reforms. The GoSTP is progressively assuming a stronger leadership over
donor coordination. The WBG has successfully leveraged financing from partners and TFs for
both lending and analytical and advisory work in several critical areas, including in transportation,
energy, financial sector, private sector development, climate, education, and skills development as
detailed in Annex 9.
12
<<<PDF_PAGE_13>>>
C. PROGRESS TOWARDS 2014-2018 CPS OUTCOMES
23. Results under the WBG-supported program have so far been broadly satisfactory. As
Figure 1 shows, one of the ten outcomes is achieved, four are on track, three are partially on track,
and two are off track. Progress against the indicators for each outcome is detailed in Annex 3.
24. CPS Outcome 1: Strengthened public financial and natural resource management is
partially on track. Despite delays and the cancellation of two DPOs (P146953 and P151500)
targets for two indicators were achieved, such as development of a debt management strategy and
dissemination of an Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) report (P130994). The
targets for three others are on track to be achieved. World Bank support helped to enhance
transparency of oil and fisheries industries. Through technical assistance (TA), the World Bank
helped STP to prepare EITI reports which describe the legal, contractual and fiscal frameworks
applicable to the oil sector. Also, through the Adaptation to Climate Change Project (GEF-
P111669), the World Bank has helped STP publish fishing licenses.
25. CPS Outcome 2: Enhanced statistical system is on track. The population and housing
census was completed and disseminated between 2012 and 2014. In addition, a third national
household survey was completed in 2018. Analysis of the results is now underway, which will
feed into the upcoming poverty assessment and then serve as an input for the SCD.
26. CPS Outcome 3: Improved private sector capacity with a focus on the tourism sector
and SMEs is off track, as the original indicators and milestones were not met. These results
were to be supported by the STP Competitiveness and Growth Project (P149262), which was
dropped to reflect the country’s priorities in the allocation of the modest IDA17 funding. In
addition, applications put forth to the Institutional Development Fund (IDF) and the Competitive
Industries and Innovation Program (CIIP) TFs were not successful. Nevertheless, there were
several achievements towards the outcome not reflected in the original indicators. With the support
of an IFC Advisory Services Project, the Directorate General of Tourism and Hospitality (DGTH)
completed a new tourism strategy informed by extensive consultations with the private sector.
Furthermore, DGTH implemented the first round of monitoring tourist satisfaction through exit
surveys, launched an inventory of tourism assets, and trained and certified a cadre of officially
recognized tour guides.
27. CPS Outcome 4: Improved business environment and trade regulations is partially
on track. There has been significant progress in the areas of business entry and trade facilitation.
The establishment of the online platform linked to the Guiché Único de Empresas (one stop shop)
has improved business entry, making it possible for more than 650 companies to register online,
with procedures and costs reduced, the time to register cut in half, and the minimum capital
requirement eliminated. Furthermore, construction permits have been facilitated with new laws
that came into effect in 2016, while property registration has been made easier with a reduction in
fees starting in 2017. In trade, the introduction of an electronic single window for trade has
simplified the process to export and import by consolidating trade-related agencies on an online
platform, facilitating payments and procedures. While progress has clearly been made in these
areas, the original indicators were based on an older version of the Doing Business report, which
13
<<<PDF_PAGE_14>>>
has only partially captured these improvements and whose methodology has changed since the
inception of this CPS.
28. CPS Outcome 5: Better targeting of energy subsidies is on track and the scope of the
WBG’s support to the energy sector has broadened well beyond this outcome. WBG’s support
to the energy sector considerably surpassed original CPS plans and now includes the DPO series,
investment lending and TA. The Power Sector Recovery Project (PSRP - P157096) is supporting
the rehabilitation of the main hydropower plant to provide additional renewable energy supply,
which will improve both reliability and cost in the medium term. The WBG is also assisting the
Government to put in place short term and affordable bridge power solutions.8 The Strengthening
Energy Sector Monitoring and Planning Capacity in STP TA (P155621) is conducting survey work
that will inform the implementation of future investments in the sector with a focus on distributed
solar photovoltaic. A 20-year Least-Cost Development Plan (LCDP) was prepared in 2018, with
the objective of reducing cost of generation by promoting the integration of low-cost renewables
in the energy mix.9 Under the PSRP, TA is also provided to the Regulator AGER (Autoridade
Geral de Regulação) to strengthen its capacity to conduct the tariff structure and regulation
process. A related Energy Household and Enterprise survey was completed in 2018 and data
analysis is ongoing for final dissemination in May 2019. This will help to better assess the level
of subsidy and better identify households to be targeted. The World Bank has also successfully
leveraged resources (including US$13 million from the European Investment Bank (EIB)) that
will help transform the performance of STP’s energy sector (see Annex 5).
29. CPS Outcome 6: Improved regional broadband connectivity is fully achieved,
significantly surpassing the targets. As noted above, the CAB2 project has allowed the
telecommunication sector to take a “giant step” forward in STP. The arrival of high-speed
international connectivity, the first-time introduction of sector competition, the update of the legal
and regulatory framework and of regulatory capacity building, have allowed a strong and sustained
development of the telecommunications sector to benefit the STP population. The CAB2 project
substantially achieved all its objectives including: access to and use of regional broadband
network; reduction in international and domestic telecom prices; and competition. The Project
ensured high-speed connection to the internet for all secondary schools. Furthermore, the Quality
Education for All Project (P146877) has financed internet connectivity for the majority of primary
schools.
30. CPS Outcome 7: Improved poverty targeting is partially on track. STP has made
significant progress in Social Protection (SP), specifically with the approval of the National Social
Protection Policy and Strategy (PENPS) in 2014. With the support of three ASAs,10 the
Government has overhauled its social safety nets approach. Specifically, it developed the basic
elements of a Social Protection System including: (i) detailed program documents and operational
manuals for the implementation of the three core SP programs defined in the PENPS; (ii) a
targeting methodology to properly select SP beneficiaries and increase effectiveness of public
8 The ongoing effort involves potential investment support from the AfDB.
9 Least-Cost Power Development Plan for STP, 2018.
10 ‘Building Blocks for the Social Protection System’ (P149534), the ‘Development of Effective Delivery System for
Social Protection’ (TF0A4617-P163445), and the GFDRR-JIT grant ‘Building households adaptation to climate
change through social protection in STP.’
14
<<<PDF_PAGE_15>>>
expenditure; (iii) a Single Registry of SP programs; and (iv) effective payment and M&E systems.
All SP beneficiaries (over 3,000 households) have been registered in the Social Registry which
has allowed improved program targeting. Contrary to initial plans, a new public works program
under the SSN TF project was not implemented and the Government opted for strengthening the
existing Groups of Interest in Road Maintenance (GIME) program which is being supported by
the WACA Resilience (P162337) and Transport Sector Development and Coastal Protection
(P161842) Projects. Government prioritized the implementation of the social pensions and the
design of a new cash transfer program for vulnerable families to be financed by the recently
approved Social Protection and Skills Development Project (P163088).
31. CPS Outcome 8: Increased adaptive capacity of coastal communities and reduced
potential loss of lives and assets is on track. Through the activities financed by the ‘Adaptation
to Climate Change’ Project (P111669), around 70 percent of fishermen targeted under the project
received safety at sea equipment. Also, 23 risk committees in several coastal communities were
established to more effectively disseminate early warnings for fishermen and the population to
improve preparedness and provide early relief after disasters. In four pilot communities,
participatory risk mapping helped to raise awareness, and coastal protection works combined with
vegetation planting have been used to reduce river and coastal flooding risk. The recently approved
WACA Resilience Investment Project (P162337) consolidates and expands these achievements.
32. CPS Outcome 9: Improved training of teachers in primary education is on track. With
the World Bank’s support, STP has continued to improve its primary education. Teacher training
plans were developed together with a Teacher Qualifications Framework and certification process,
all of which are improving the availability of qualified teachers. The project has also supported a
distance learning program through which nearly all unqualified teachers in primary education have
been benefitting from courses in key subjects and effective teaching methodologies. All primary
schools now receive supervision visits at least four times per year and the Ministry has recruited
54 Instruction Leaders to support teachers in their classrooms and monitor performance.
33. CPS Outcome 10: Increased access to skills development is off track. There was lack
of progress towards this outcome because it was decided to focus on reforming and improving
basic education before moving to post-basic skills development. The newly approved ‘Social
Protection and Skills Development Project’ (P163088) will enhance skills for tourism and
entrepreneurship with first results expected beyond the revised CPS period.
34. Some progress is being made towards gender equality, but gaps remain. The multi-
sectoral Institutional Capacity Building Project (P162129) has gender-specific activities and
targets in its results framework, including for credit registry coverage, for property titling, and for
training in statistics and procurement. The WACAR Project (P162337) closely looked into gender
dimensions of adaptation strategies for coastal communities and integrated women’s experience
in adaptation strategies. Overall STP has closed gender-based enrolment gaps. However, the high
levels of early pregnancy threaten school completion rates for adolescent girls. A transformative
approach to boost economic and social outcomes is therefore adopted for the remaining years of
the CPS (see paragraph 44 below).
15
<<<PDF_PAGE_16>>>
Figure 1: Progress Towards Achieving CPS Outcomes
16
<<<PDF_PAGE_17>>>
4. EMERGING LESSONS
35. The World Bank’s portfolio in STP is still very small, thus limiting operational
lessons. Nevertheless, the CPS program has demonstrated that the WBG can successfully support
transformational change in STP. CPS implementation thus far has yielded several insights about
things that are going well, those of which we need to do more, things that did not go well, and
those which need to be adjusted:
(i) Continue to strategically combine IDA resources with financing from TFs, regional
sources, and other DPs to drive transformational change in STP. The Regional CAB2
Project (P117652) opened unprecedented possibilities in the country, such as online
visas, online single windows for businesses to government procedures, and distance
learning for teachers in remote areas. This project shows that by leveraging financing
from the Regional Integration Program, even limited volumes of IDA resources can
support change with considerable positive ripple effects on the business environment,
tourism and social outcomes. TFs allowed progress in improving the business
environment and social protection, which shifted from a paper-based system to a
poverty-targeted program. These transformations will now be scaled up under the
Social Protection and Skills Project (P163088). The ambitious support being provided
to the energy sector is greatly facilitated by the EIB’s parallel financing.
(ii) Strengthen policy dialogue and deepen mutual trust with the authorities to overcome
difficulties faced in the preparation of DPOs. Several DPOs were delayed or cancelled
because STP either borrowed non-concessionally or signed memoranda of
understanding for megaprojects with potential Non-Concessional Borrowing Policy
implications. Some of these projects lacked credible feasibility studies. Going forward
the CPS will provide support to enhance institutional capacity for public investment
management and stronger debt management, which will help avoid interruptions in the
continued DPO program. These lessons are all the more relevant with the arrival of the
new Government.
(iii) Enhance support to implementation for continued satisfactory performance of the
scaled-up portfolio. Project design will need to rely on simple implementation
mechanisms, given STP’s institutional and capacity constraints. In addition,
implementation challenges will be addressed through strengthening the centralized
implementation and fiduciary unit, AFAP, as well as promoting better coordination and
between AFAP and line ministries. Continued support from the field-based
procurement specialist will remain critical.
(iv) Better reflect STP’s high unit costs – due to small scale and remote location – in
project design. The markets are small, with limited competitiveness, causing the prices
to be significantly higher than in the African continent (up to 30–50 percent higher).
Construction materials need either to be imported, or when procured locally, are
produced in small quantities. Both situations cause the unit costs to be high, as prices
reflect cost of transportation or lack of economy of scale for locally sourced materials.
Under the Power Sector Recovery Project (P157096), for example, detailed design of
17
<<<PDF_PAGE_18>>>
the rehabilitation works revealed a considerable financing gap because of high unit
costs, which is being addressed through an AF. Henceforth, these high unit costs need
to be taken into account for project costing, and an unallocated amount should be kept
to cover unforeseen cost overruns due to insularity.
(v) Utilize strategic communication campaigns, which have proven helpful to tackle
gender-based social norms linked to women and girls’ disempowerment. The country
program will continue to capitalize on the successful communication campaign and
outreach to beneficiaries that was developed by the Ministry of Social Protection in the
context of the Development of Effective Delivery Systems for SP TF (P163445). Both
the recently approved Social Protection and Skills Development Project (P163088) and
the forthcoming Girls Empowerment and Quality Education for All Project will benefit
from this experience as they seek to tackle binding constraints to human capital
formation for girls and young women, such as persistent high levels of fertility.
5. ADJUSTMENTS TO THE COUNTRY PARTNERSHIP STRATEGY
36. The GoSTP seeks WBG support to address priority developmental challenges
included in its recently adopted program, to which the revised CPS objectives - detailed
below - will broadly respond.11 The Government established on December 3, 2018, seeks to
achieve two main objectives: to reach an average growth rate of 7 percent; and to reinforce social
cohesion. The program is organized around four strategic axes: (i) strengthening democracy and
the rule of law; (ii) robust economic growth with accelerated job creation (with a considerable
focus on higher quality education); (iii) improved quality of health services and social protection;
and (iv) foreign policy to support development.
37. With a more than quadrupled IDA18 allocation, the PLR reflects the opportunity to
help STP accelerate progress towards the twin goals, including a strong focus on climate
change resilience. At the same time, selectivity is increased by consolidating the number of
outcomes from ten to seven. The adjustments to the program seek to support a more ambitious
development agenda, bringing the WBG’s comparative advantages of financing, advice and
convening power to enable diversification and growth, build human capital and girls’
empowerment, and promote resilience to climate change. The indicative IDA18 allocation for STP
is in the range of US$65-75 million.12 The World Bank will also look for opportunities to tap into
IDA’s Regional Program to support regional integration efforts, as done for coastal protection with
the WACA Resilience Project. IDA, IFC, and MIGA are exploring opportunities to mobilize
private capital, de-risk investments, and promote private sector-based growth, including through
the use of IDA18 IFC-MIGA Private Sector Window (PSW). Leveraging will also be undertaken
by collaborating with DPs.
11 The CMU organized a half-day workshop with the GoSTP in September 2016 to discuss progress and agreed on the
program for FY17-FY20. This program was further confirmed during successive Annual and Spring Meetings as well
as country visits, most recently in January 2019 with the new Government.
12 Referenced IDA18 volumes are indicative. Actual PBA allocations will be determined annually during the FY18-
20 period and will depend on: (i) total IDA resources available; (ii) the number of IDA-eligible countries; (iii) the
country’s performance rating, per capita GNI, and population; and (iv) the performance and other allocation
parameters for other IDA borrowers.
18
<<<PDF_PAGE_19>>>
38. Following the design of the original CPS and applying lessons learned, the WBG will
continue to strategically apply a mix of instruments to drive development results in STP.
Lending to STP is in the form of IPFs and DPOs. Considering STP’s vulnerability to natural
shocks, contingent financing instruments such as the Contingent Emergency Response
Components (CERCs) are being included in new projects, such as the Transport Sector
Development and Coastal Protection Project (P161842). As noted above, the WBG will continue
to leverage TF resources and financing of DPs.
39. The PLR extends the period of the FY14-FY18 CPS for two more years to FY20. The
extension would allow time to build ownership and trust with the new GoSTP. It will also allow
the next CPF to be informed by the findings of the forthcoming SCD, as well as a Poverty
Assessment, which will be based the results of the national household survey. With a higher IDA18
allocation, the WBG will be able to support a more ambitious development agenda. Table 4 below
summarizes the proposed additional financing under this PLR for the remainder of the extended
CPS period. The previous CPS two focus areas have been revised, streamlined and aligned to new
government priorities and to the enlarged IDA envelope. The remainder of this section summarizes
the PLR’s changes to the Focus Areas and CPS outcomes. (Annex 1 includes an updated results
matrix. Annex 2 provides details on specific changes to the CPS).
Table 4: PLR Indicative CPS Financing Plans, FY19-FY2013
PLR Indicative Financing Amount
(US$ million)
AF to STP Power Sector Recovery Project (P168335) 10
Third Strengthening Growth and First Policy DPO (P164321) 5
STP Girls Empowerment and Quality Education for All Project (P169222) 15
STP DPO New Series (P168335) 5
40. Advisory work will remain a critical component of the WBG’s work in STP. Analytic
work is critical to support the GoSTP as it seeks to better understand the challenges and
opportunities facing the country. A Poverty Assessment (P167907) will help inform dialogue and
policies on poverty and inequality, while a Country Economic Memorandum (P164180) will
enhance understanding of the reforms needed to boost private sector-led growth in agriculture,
fisheries and tourism. STP will also benefit from just in time TA as part of a programmatic multi-
country ASA on Human Capital. A Digital Economy Gap Analysis will be undertaken in FY20 to
support the shift from broadband connectivity to bridging digitals gaps and unlocking digital
economy potential. (See Table 5).
13 IDA financing through the end of FY19-FY20 is subject to the availability of IDA18 resources, and if necessary,
financing operations may be postponed into FY21.
19
<<<PDF_PAGE_20>>>
Table 5: Expected ASA, FY19-FY20
Knowledge/ASA Product Planned Delivery
World Bank Resolution and Payment Strengthening (P159937) Q4 of FY19
Country Economic Memorandum (P164180) Q4 of FY19
Poverty Assessment (P167907) Q4 of FY19
Strengthening Energy Sector Monitoring and Planning Capacity (P155621) Q1 of FY20
Digital Economy Gap Analysis Q4 of FY20
Programmatic Multi-country ASA on Human Capital Q4 of FY20
41. The PLR will aim to help STP address its vulnerability to climate change by including
adaptation measures across the portfolio, while seeking opportunities for reducing
greenhouse gas emissions and air pollution. Given its insularity and the volcanic nature of its
geology, most of STP’s economic activities and assets are located along the coast. Because of the
country’s geographic morphology, location, and climate change effects (especially floods and
coastal erosions), adequate protection and resilient designs for infrastructure are critical. Hence,
the WACA Resilience Project (P162337) and the Transport Sector Development and Coastal
Protection (P161842) projects were designed with a focus on climate change resilience, as
reflected in the climate co-benefits of 100 percent and 96 percent, respectively. Reducing
greenhouse gas emissions and air pollution will be achieved through the Power Sector Recovery
Project (P157096) which supports a greater proportion of hydro-electricity in the energy mix and
thus contributes to the global climate change mitigation agenda. The AF to the Power Sector
Recovery Project (P168335) co-benefit is therefore likely to be high.
42. This PLR adjusts the first CPS Theme from ‘Supporting Macroeconomic Stability
and National Competitiveness’ to ‘Supporting Macroeconomic Stability and Inclusive
Growth’ while reducing the outcomes from six to four. This adjustment reflects client requests
for scaled-up WBG support to private-sector led and inclusive growth. The PLR adjusts the focus
of some outcomes and consolidates them from six to four under this theme. The PLR also narrows
the focus of Outcome 1 to increasing fiscal revenues and the quality of public expenditures with
less emphasis on natural resource management, due to low expectations for oil exploitation.
Outcome 2 combines the existing emphasis on Extractive Industries governance and transparency
(oil and fisheries) with State Owned Enterprise (SOE) governance, a new priority, as it greatly
affects macro-economic stability and service delivery. Outcome 3 combines ICT with energy and
transport as they comprise the main infrastructure bottlenecks to inclusive growth, adding
transport, as a new priority. Outcome 4 focuses on improving the business environment with an
emphasis on tourism and SMEs.
43. The PLR streamlines the outcomes in the second CPS Theme: ‘Reduced Vulnerability
and Strengthened Human Capacity’ from four to three. In line with client demand, the PLR
introduces CPS Outcome 5 focused on enhancing education and skills, which consolidates original
CPS outcomes on training teachers and skills development. Outcome 6 highlights statistical
capacity and poverty targeting to support social safety nets for vulnerable groups. Outcome 7
remains focused on increased adaptive capacity of coastal communities and reduced loss of lives
and assets in fisheries. Accordingly, outcomes, milestones and results were revised.
20
<<<PDF_PAGE_21>>>
44. The WBG plans to step up its efforts to reduce gender gaps and boost girls’ and
women’s economic and social empowerment. Ongoing and planned operations devote specific
attention to gender aspects including gender-sensitive activities and sub-components, including in
the institutional capacity building, education, energy, transport, social protection and WACA
projects. The breadth of the WBG’s engagement to boost girls’ and women’s economic and social
empowerment is summarized below, as framed by the WBG Gender Strategy:
• Reducing gaps in human endowments. World Bank engagement will help prevent early
pregnancy and high levels of child bearing for women through a multipronged approach
addressing underlying social norms and cost-related barriers: (i) the Social Protection and
Skills Project provides sensitization sessions including family planning, and it partners
with United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF) for parental
education sessions for both women and men, which directly address fertility; (ii) the cash
transfers program under the Project will gradually become a fully conditional cash transfer,
as the Project will aim to keep girls longer in schools by connecting the social safety net
information system with education attendance data. Moving forward, the proposed Girls
Empowerment and Quality Education for All Project will address the secondary level of
education and reinforce activities - establishing close linkages with the Social Safety Nets
Program - to encourage school completion, prevent early pregnancy and bring back young
girls who have dropped out due to pregnancy. In support of the gradual introduction of
conditional cash transfers for girls, the respective information systems of the education and
social protection ministries will be strengthened, allowing data-sharing and gradual
interoperability.
• Promoting access to more and better jobs. Under the Social Protection and Skills Project,
young women will benefit from the opportunity to attend vocational training programs and
enhance their employability in the tourism industry. Women will also benefit from gender-
sensitive entrepreneurship training. The Transport Sector Development and Coastal
Protection Project finances capacity building and training related to road maintenance,
leadership and management to promote women's professional development.
• Enhancing voice and preventing gender-based violence (GBV). All projects foster
participation mechanisms and include Grievance and Redress Mechanisms (GRM) where
women’s voices can be heard, and shape public interventions supported by the Bank. All
projects will also seek to address, prevent and/or mitigate GBV, which is high in STP. To
prevent conflict risks linked to the designation of women as cash recipients, the cash
transfer program under the Social Protection and Skills Project includes parental and
beneficiary training on intra-household conflict-resolution and empowerment. Finally, to
mitigate risks of potential sexual harassment during vocational training courses, all trainers
will receive sensitization sessions and students will be empowered to use the GRM to
safely report disrespectful behaviors.
45. Partnerships and capacity building will also remain critical priorities. Effective
collaboration with DPs and ongoing dialogue with domestic stakeholders (as described in
paragraphs 21-22) have been instrumental and will continue. Finally, keen attention to capacity
building – including the multi-sectoral Institutional Capacity Building Project (P162129) and the
21
<<<PDF_PAGE_22>>>
more regular staff presence in STP – reflect the lessons learned to ensure the sustainability of WBG
support.
THEME ONE: SUPPORTING MACROECONOMIC STABILITY AND INCLUSIVE GROWTH
46. The GoSTP’s new program aims to unblock constraints to inclusive, private sector-
driven growth, while pursuing measures to ensure macroeconomic stability. STP is highly
dependent on aid inflows and this leads to recurring fiscal pressures due to aid volatility. The
GoSTP is implementing reforms to enhance domestic revenue mobilization, while strengthening
public expenditure management and implementing reforms to strengthen the performance of
SOEs. STP also must ensure transparency in the management of its extractive industries (fisheries
and oil).
47. Accelerated private sector-driven, and inclusive and sustainable growth is hindered
by infrastructure constraints, inadequacies in the framework for doing business and scarcity
of skills. The GoSTP chose tourism, agriculture, fisheries, and transit and facilitation as drivers
for inclusive growth in the long term. The GoSTP plans to (i) implement an ambitious public
investment program in transport (to improve the airport, improve the road networks, and thus
connectivity) which will yield results only during the next CPF period; and (ii) increase access and
reliability of power supply. The GoSTP also plans to implement reforms to enhance the business
environment notably to attract private investors to the tourism, fisheries, transit and facilitation,
and agriculture sectors.
48. Based on the existing CPS focus areas (expenditure and debt management, ICT,
energy, business environment and the financial sector) and emerging new priorities (SOE
performance and transport) the revised CPS focus area one will have four key outcomes: (i)
increased fiscal revenues and improved quality of public expenditures; (ii) strengthened SOE
governance and transparency of extractive industries; (iii) fostered growth enhancing reforms in
ICT and the energy sector; and (iv) improved business environment with a focus on tourism and
SMEs. The support to the transport sector will yield results only during the follow up CPF period.
World Bank support will be channeled through the DPO series, IPFs and ASA. Continued
coordination across IDA, IFC and MIGA, will help to further strengthen the investment climate,
including ongoing efforts to improve the energy sector, ICT connectivity/affordability and
payment systems. Planned future IFC activities include launching the STP Leasing Program.
Revised CPS Outcome 1: Increased fiscal revenues and improved quality of public
expenditures
49. Given STP’s continued macro-fiscal challenges, the program will continue to focus on
enhancing fiscal performance, through revenue mobilization, improved expenditure quality,
and enhanced debt management capacity. Currently, STP mobilizes tax revenues around 13-14
percent of GDP, with public spending about 30 percent of GDP in 2015-2016. STP is
implementing fiscal reforms to enhance revenue mobilization, strengthening PFM to ensure
transparent, sound, and efficient management of public resources, and improving debt
management. The revised CPS expands the ongoing support provided to the GoSTP in
coordination with the IMF, French Development Agency (Agence Française de Développement)
22
<<<PDF_PAGE_23>>>
AFD, and EU to strengthen revenue mobilization and improve the quality of public expenditures
through the Institutional Capacity Building Project (P162129) and the DPO series. Specific
reforms being supported in this area include the introduction of a value added tax, better planning,
budgeting and forecasting of public expenditures, improved public investment management,
modernized public procurement, and strengthened debt management systems.
Revised CPS Outcome 2: Strengthened SOE governance and improved transparency
50. The Program will have an increased focus on tackling SOEs transparency, efficiency,
and financial viability challenges. SOEs have long-standing issues related to their transparency,
efficiency, and financial viability which contribute to higher fiscal risks. SOEs in STP have an
adequate legal and regulatory framework, but implementation is weak, and ownership and
accountability mechanisms are unclear. Through the Power Sector Recovery Project (P157096),
TA and the DPO series, the World Bank is supporting reforms in the national electricity company
(EMAE). Meanwhile, the Public Expenditure Review (P161140) and the DPO series will inform
future SOE reforms with implementation support to be provided by the Institutional Capacity
Building Project (P16212). Specific reforms are expected to lead to improved capacity for SOE
reporting, monitoring, and transparency.
Revised CPS Outcome 3: Fostered growth-enhancing reforms in ICT, energy, and transport
sectors
51. Inspired by the transformational impact achieved on ICT connectivity a similar
approach will be pursued to other key enabling sectors for private sector development,
namely transport and energy. The GoSTP plans to continue improving ICT while addressing
infrastructure issues in energy and transport, both with significant potential for positive impacts
on inclusive growth. Investments will ensure climate resilience and adequate protection in design
for infrastructure. In ICT, the revised CPS will support a shift from broadband connectivity to
bridging digital gaps, underpinned by a Digital Economy Gap Analysis which will pave the way
for further engagement to unluck the digital potential under the next CPF period. In the energy
sector the Power Sector Recovery Project and its planned AF (P168335) will increase renewable
energy generation and improve the reliability of the electricity supply. In transport, the recently
approved Transport Sector Development and Coastal Protection Project (P161842) will
rehabilitate National Road 1 from Sao Tome to Guadalupe and strengthen the technical and
management capacity of the National Roads Agency (INAE), the Road Fund and the community-
based GIME association in charge of road maintenance. It will also protect the sea front and the
main roads from impacts caused by submersion, erosion and landslides, currently affecting both
the pavement and the structure of the road. Finally, it will improve road safety by developing and
implementing a national road safety strategy, with an emphasis on vulnerable road users such as
pedestrians. The first results for this project will only emerge during the next CPF period.
52. With energy being a critical bottleneck for private sector development, the Bank will
support the foundations for private sector investment in the sector, seeking an MFD
approach in collaboration with IFC and MIGA. Private financing is critical to add a needed
54.8 MW in generating capacity between 2018-203514, a threefold increase from current levels.
14 Least-Cost Power Development Plan for STP, 2018.
23
<<<PDF_PAGE_24>>>
However, STP Power sector is facing binding constraints to private sector participation mainly
linked to (i) the poor financial situation of the sector, (ii) the absence of an effective regulatory
framework to ensure financial viability15 and quality of service and (iii) lack of a sound PPP
framework. Under the revised CPS, the IFC and the World B will coordinate closely to help GoSTP
to address these constraints thus laying the foundations for the MFD approach and identifying
potential private sector participation in the power sector, especially in the renewable energy space.
Under the Power Sector Recovery Project (P157096) the Contador hydropower project is being
rehabilitated with a view to increasing its installed capacity from 1.5 MW to 3.2 MW by 2022,
which represents 12 % of the generation capacity necessary to meet energy demand. With support
of the same project and the DPO series (P159010), the Bank is supporting: (i) a tariff study; (ii)
strengthening of the utility (EMAE) and the regulatory agency (AGER): and (iii) financing of a
Transaction Advisor to identify emergency generation solutions that would lower cost of
generation. A Management Improvement Plan and Least-Cost Development Plan (LCDP) were
developed and should be endorsed as prior actions under the DPO. A PPIAF grant16 is supporting
the GoSTP to prepare a PPP strategy in the energy sector based on a review of the effectiveness of
the legal and regulatory framework,17 as well as an assessment of the sector's investment
and capacity needs in coordination with the LCDP. The review of the PPP framework will
consider the fiscal risks brought by PPPs, especially in a context of high debt and low domestic
revenue like STP. The revised CPS will continue to finance investment and TA needed to ensure
security of supply in the short term, improve EMAE performance and establish the enabling
environment to attract private financing in the medium term (see Annex 5).
Revised CPS Outcome 4: Improved business environment, with a focus on tourism and
SMEs
53. Building on the achievements to date, activities will continue for improving the
business environment and strengthening the financial sector. In spite of the progress made,
much more needs to be done to further improve ease of doing business, open access to credit
particularly to micro, small, and medium enterprises to develop their business, and spur sustainable
tourism. Through TAs, the DPO series and the Institutional Capacity Building Project (P162129),
the WBG will provide support for the business enabling environment, including property
registration, credit information infrastructure (credit and moveable asset registries), microfinance,
mobile payments, and improved capacity for banking sector supervision during the remainder of
the extended CPS period. These cross-cutting reforms can help promote growth in key sectors such
as tourism.
`THEME TWO: STRENGTHENING HUMAN CAPACITY AND REDUCING VULNERABILITY
54. STP made considerable progress enhancing human capital in its efforts towards the
MDGs, but challenges remain. To increase growth and inclusion the country needs to become
more strategic in its investments in human capital, including through a better performing education
sector, more effective and targeted safety nets, and adequate instruments for adaptation to climate
15 This is a pre-requisite to make the national utility a credible off-taker for any Independent Power Producer.
16 TF0A7283 - Private Sector Participation options to foster Renewable Energy and achieve Nationally Determined
Contributions targets.
17 Including a PPP Law—Lei no. 06/2018 promulgated by the President of the Republic on March 12, 2018.
24
<<<PDF_PAGE_25>>>
change by vulnerable populations. Better trained teachers and stronger supervision of schools are
needed to improve the quality of education. In addition, to develop a more effective social
protection system, accurate targeting and management systems are key. Thus, a good statistics
system is critical to provide both data for adequate targeting and measuring impacts of
interventions. At the same time, clear links between safety nets’ beneficiaries and skills
development initiatives need to be established to enhance the productivity and employability of
poor households. Finally, the adaptive capacity to climate change of coastal communities, among
the most vulnerable, needs to be increased while reducing the potential loss of assets and lives.
Considering ongoing and planned support by other DPs such as AfDB, the EU, and the UN
agencies, the WBG will support this revised CPS Theme to achieve reforms in education and skills
strengthening, social protection and adaptive capacity of coastal communities through IPFs, DPOs
and ASA.
Revised CPS Outcome 5: Enhanced education quality
55. While STP has achieved almost universal access to primary education, literacy rates
above 95 percent and progression to secondary education of 100 percent, focus now needs to
turn to the quality of education and the employability of graduates. To tap into the potential
to accelerate growth offered by tourism and agriculture, STP would need to strengthen its skill
base to better respond to market needs. The ongoing Quality Education for All Project (P146877)
supports improved teacher training and school supervision. The forthcoming Girls Empowerment
and Quality Education for All Project will bring a more comprehensive approach to improved
quality, enhancing the scope of the World Bank’s support to both pre-school and secondary levels,
and with a much-enhanced emphasis on gender aspects. A first step in the gradual introduction of
conditional cash transfers for girls’ education and prevention of teen pregnancy will be the
strengthening of the information systems and the agreement of the Ministries of Education and
Social Protection to share data on school attendance. This expected improvement is now reflected
in the introduction of a new outcome indicator, the signing of a memorandum of understanding
(MoU) between the Ministries of Education and Social Protection describing the key principles of
their collaboration, including data-sharing. Finally, the newly approved Social Protection and
Skills Development Project (P163088) will enhance skills for tourism and entrepreneurship. First
results for the latter two projects are expected beyond the period of the extended CPS period.
Revised CPS Outcome 6: Improved poverty targeting and access to social safety nets for
vulnerable groups
56. To promote poverty reduction that is more inclusive and sustainable, the PLR will
sustain efforts to protect vulnerable communities and promote economic opportunities. In
2016, the budget for social protection and social assistance in STP accounted for less than 0.65
percent of GDP, well below the African average of 1.2 percent of GDP. Building on TA financed
by the Rapid Social Response TF, the Social Protection and Skills Development Project (P163088)
will support the upgrade and scale up of the current social protection delivery systems which, to
date, have limited scope, capacity and funding. The Project is expected to support the upgrade and
scale up of core SP delivery systems through (i) an accurate targeting system, (ii) a payment
system, (iii) a Management Information System to improve cost-efficiency and effectiveness of
current programs, and (iv) a monitoring and evaluation system. In addition, the Project includes a
25
<<<PDF_PAGE_26>>>
conditional cash transfer component which will significantly expand coverage for extremely poor
households, based upon the targeting methodology.
Revised CPS Outcome 7: Increased adaptive capacity of coastal communities and reduced
risk of loss of lives and assets
57. During the revised CPS period the WBG will contribute to increasing adaptive
capacity of vulnerable coastal communities and help STP address its vulnerability to climate
change and natural disasters. The recently adopted WACA Project (P162337) will support the
GoSTP with increased awareness of climate change through participatory mapping as well as
piloting adaptation strategies, combining soft and hard protection works, in addition to voluntary
relocation of population to safer areas. For coastal communities, another critical challenge is the
adoption of safer practices by fishermen who face increasing risks. The WACA Project is
promoting activities that disseminate better information on weather and provide safety equipment
to manage these risks, thereby saving lives and reducing the loss of assets that trap these
communities in poverty. As noted earlier, the newly approved Transport Sector Development and
Coastal Protection Project (P161842) will greatly help to protect the sea front and the main roads
from impacts caused by submersion, erosion and landslides. It will also support a detailed
assessment of vulnerabilities in road transport and develop a strategy for enhancing its climate
resilience in line with the adaptation measures included in the NDC18. Results under this project
are expected in the subsequent CPF period.
6. RISKS TO REVISED CPS PROGRAM
58. Compared to FY14, risks to the CPS outcomes have broadly remained stable, with
some shifts in composition. First, political and governance risks have risen to substantial, given
the narrow majority held by the coalition government. The risks related to macroeconomic
sustainability remain substantial, as STP’s fiscal framework is fragile and could worsen. These
governance and macroeconomic risks are being mitigated by close monitoring, a sequence of
DPOs to advance reforms, and technical assistance. Institutional capacity for implementation and
sustainability is very weak, and efforts to strengthen capacity are complicated by the high staff
rotation in key ministries. This staff turnover along with the growth of the portfolio also raises
fiduciary risks to substantial. Technical assistance, close supervision of projects, regular portfolio
reviews, and the recent posting of the Senior Procurement Specialist all help mitigate these risks.
Finally, as a small-island state, STP remains highly vulnerable to climate change (particularly
floods and coastal erosion), a risk which WBG engagement aims to mitigate through such
engagements as enhancing resilience of coastal communities and building climate resilient
infrastructure.
18 The STP “Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC)” prepared for the twenty-first session of the Conference of
the Parties (COP21) stated that resilience to erosion and maritime as well as river and storm flooding of coastal areas
through improved Coastal Protection of vulnerable communities should be one of the main climate change adaption
measures.
26
<<<PDF_PAGE_27>>>
Table 6: STP Revised Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool (SORT)
Risk Rating Revised Rating
(H, S, M, L)
1 Political & governance Substantial
2 Macroeconomic Substantial
3 Sector strategies and policies Low
4 Technical design of project/ program Low
5 Institutional capacity for implementation and Substantial
sustainability
6 Fiduciary Substantial
7 Environmental & social Substantial
8 Stakeholders Low
9 Other -
Overall Substantial
27
<<<PDF_PAGE_28>>>
Annex 1: Updated Results Matrix
Revised CPS Indicators (FY14–FY20) Supplementary Indicators WBG Engagement
Revised CPS Theme One: Supporting Macroeconomic Stability and Inclusive Growth
STP’s Transformation Agenda aims to unblock constraints to private sector driven, inclusive growth and it includes measures to ensure macroeconomic
stability, ease infrastructure bottlenecks and improve the business environment.
STP is highly dependent on aid inflows, the volatility of which exposes the country to recurring fiscal pressures. The GoSTP is implementing reforms to
enhance domestic revenue mobilization, while strengthening PFM. As Government investment is expected to remain high, thanks to the unprecedented IDA18
increase and to financing from the People’s Republic of China (PRC), strengthening the framework for public investment management is vital. As domestic
revenue continues to be low and the debt level remains high STP needs to pursue fiscal consolidation, to subject expenditures to a hard budget constraint and
to place public debt on a sustainable path. Meanwhile, STP also needs to improve transparency and performance in the management of SOEs and extractive
industries (fisheries and oil), which have a high impact on the country’s public finances.
Private sector driven, inclusive growth is hindered by infrastructure constraints, by inadequacies in the framework for doing business and by the scarcity of
skills. The GoSTP chose tourism, agriculture, fisheries, and transit and facilitation, as drivers for inclusive growth in the long term. The GoSTP plans to
implement an ambitious public investment program in transport (to improve the road networks and the airport) for which results will only be seen during the
next CPF period, while continuing to increase access and reliability of power supply, and to enhance information and communication technologies (ICT). The
GoSTP also plans to implement reforms to enhance the business environment, notably to attract private investors to the tourism, fisheries, transit and facilitation,
and agriculture sectors.
Considering support provided in the first phase of the CPS (expenditure and debt management, ICT, energy, business environment, financial sector), emerging
new priorities (SOE performance, transport) and ongoing and planned support by the IMF, AfDB, EU, and bilateral partners such as China and the Netherlands,
this PLR adjusts the CPS program and organizes the support during the remaining CPS period into four key outcomes: (i) increased fiscal revenues and
improved quality of public expenditures; (ii) strengthened SOE and extractive industries governance and improved transparency; (iii) improved performance
of the infrastructure sector (ICT energy, and transport); and (iv) improved business environment with a focus on the tourism sector and SMEs. WBG support
will be channeled through the DPO series, IPFs and ASA.
Revised CPS Outcome 1: Increased fiscal revenues and improved quality of public expenditures
This post-MDRI country is in debt distress. It mobilizes tax revenues hovering around 13-14 percent of GDP, and public spending was about 30 percent of
GDP in 2015-16. STP is implementing fiscal reforms to enhance revenue mobilization, strengthening PFM to ensure transparent, sound, and efficient
management of public resources, and improve debt management. The revised CPS will expand the ongoing support provided to the GoSTP in coordination
with the IMF, AfDB, and EU to strengthen revenue mobilization and improve the quality of public expenditures through ASA, a capacity strengthening IPF
and development policy financing.
28
<<<PDF_PAGE_29>>>
Revised CPS Indicators (FY14–FY20) Supplementary Indicators WBG Engagement
Revised CPS Indicator 1.1: Tax revenues as a share of 1.1: Preparation, auditing, and Completed Financing:
GDP: presentation of State annual financial • 1st ‘Strengthening Growth and Building Foundations
statements for legislative scrutiny: f o r P o v e r t y R e d u c t i o n ’ D P O ( P 1 5 9010)
• Baseline (2014): 14.3 % • 2nd ‘Strengthening Growth and Fiscal Policy’ DPO
• Target (2020): 15.8% • Baseline (2013): Annual (P161707)
statement for 2010 submitted
for audit. Completed ASA:
• Target (2020): Annual • ROSC (Report on the Observance of Standards and
statement prepared, audited, Codes) (P149902)
and presented to Parliament • MTDS (Medium Term Debt Management Strategy)
within 15 months after close (P147175)
of fiscal year. • Public Expenditure Review (P161140)
• Financial Sector Strategy TA Project (P150418)
1.2: Availability of budget information (‘FIRST’ TF-World Bank executed)
to the public:
• Baseline (2013): 2 out of 6
types of budget information Ongoing ASA:
under PEFA (Public • Bank Resolution and Payment System Strengthening
Expenditure and Fiscal (P159937) FIRST TF
Accountability) methodology • Institutional Capacity Building Project (Finance, PFM
made available to the public and Trade) (P162129)
within one month of their
completion. Pipeline Financing:
• Target (2020): At least 5 out • 3rd ‘Strengthening Growth and Fiscal Policy’ DPO
of 6 types of budget (P164321)
information made available
within one month.
1.3. Share of ongoing and finalized
projects with basic information
included in the National Investment
Portfolio Database:
• Baseline (2014): 0
• Target (2020): 100%
29
<<<PDF_PAGE_30>>>
Revised CPS Indicators (FY14–FY20) Supplementary Indicators WBG Engagement
Revised CPS Indicator 1.2: Number of Debt 1.4: Existence of a debt management Completed ASA:
Performance Indicators (DPI) with a score of at least a strategy: • Follow-up DeMPA (P161882)
“C” per DeMPA (Debt Management Performance • Debt Strategy Reform Plan
Assessment) methodology: • Baseline (2013): No strategy in
place Ongoing Financing:
Baseline (2016): 27 out of 33 • T arget (2020): Updated Medium- • Institutional Capacity Building Project (Finance, PFM
Target (2020): 23 out of 33 term debt strategy publicly and Trade) (P162129)
available
Revised CPS Outcome 2: Strengthened SOE governance and improved transparency
The GoSTP requested WBG support to tackle SOEs transparency, efficiency, and financial viability challenges while sustaining support to improve
transparency in the extractive industries. SOEs such as the electricity company EMAE, the National Enterprise of Airports and Air Safety (ENASA), the
National Enterprise of Ports, and Postal Service, have long standing issues related to the transparency, efficiency, and financial viability which increase fiscal
risks. STP has an adequate legal and regulatory framework for SOEs, but implementation is weak, and ownership and accountability mechanisms are unclear.
Through the Energy Sector Recovery Project, TA and the DPO series, the WBG is supporting reforms in EMAE. The Public Expenditure Review and the
ongoing DPO series will inform future SOE reforms. Through this support the WBG expects to directly help improve the overall performance of SOEs. At the
same time, the WBG will continue the support provided since the beginning of the CPS to enhance transparency of oil and fisheries industries. Through TA,
the WBG is helping STP prepare EITI reports that have so far reviewed the legal, contractual and fiscal frameworks applicable to the oil sector. Also, through
the Climate Change Adaptation grant the WBG has helped STP publish fishing licenses.
Revised CPS Indicator 2.1: Completed ASA:
External audits conducted for fully owned SOEs • Public Expenditure Review (P161140)
Completed Financing:
• Baseline (2014): N.A. • 2nd. ‘Strengthening Growth and Fiscal Policy’ DPO
(P161707)
• Target (2020): 75%
Ongoing Financing:
• Institutional Capacity Building Project (Finance, PFM
and Trade) (P162129)
Pipeline Financing:
• 3rd ‘Strengthening Growth and Fiscal Policy’ DPO
(P164321)
30
<<<PDF_PAGE_31>>>
Revised CPS Indicators (FY14–FY20) Supplementary Indicators WBG Engagement
Revised CPS Indicator 2.2: Public disclosure of new Completed ASA:
fishing agreements and licenses within one month of • Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI)
signing agreements or (Multi-Donor TF) (P130994)
issuing licenses:
• Baseline (2014): 0%
• Target (2020): 100%
Revised CPS Indicator 2.3: Improved accountability in Completed ASA:
oil sector governance: • Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI)
(Multi-Donor TF) (P130994)
• Baseline (2013): EITI reconciliation Report
• Target (2020): EITI Reconciliation Report publicly
available and disseminated in the country
Revised CPS Outcome 3: Fostering growth-enhancing reforms in ICT, energy, and transport sectors
The CPS has made a transformational impact on ICT connectivity in STP through the Central African Backbone (APL2) program. Building on this success,
the GoSTP plans to continue improving the performance of the ICT sector while addressing issues in the energy and transport sectors, which both present
significant potential to contribute to inclusive growth. The effects of good infrastructure on inclusive growth are well known. In addition, because of the
country’s geography, location, and vulnerability to climate change (especially floods and coastal erosion) adequate infrastructure is critical. Considering
ongoing and planned WBG and other DPs (EU, AfDB, and China) support, the revised CPS program maintains support to ICT and expands its interventions
to increase renewable energy generation, improve the reliability of the electricity supply, expand and improve the road network. Instruments considered include
ASA, a capacity strengthening IPF, and the DPO series. Results indicators below focus on the energy sector where an IPF is already under implementation,
while results in the transport infrastructure will only emerge during the next CPF period.
Revised CPS Indicator 3.1: Retail price of internet Completed Financing:
services • Central African Backbone (APL2)
• Baseline (2011): US$410 Pipeline ASA:
• Target (2014): US$52 • Digital Economy Gap Analysis
Revised CPS Indicator 3.2: EMAE’s technical and 3.1: Hydropower capacity Completed ASA:
non-technical losses rehabilitated: • Power Sector Efficiency Improvement TA
• Baseline (2017): 40% • Baseline (2017: 0MW
• Target (2020): 34% • Target (2020): 2MW Ongoing Financing:
• Power Sector Recovery Project (P157096)
31
<<<PDF_PAGE_32>>>
Revised CPS Indicators (FY14–FY20) Supplementary Indicators WBG Engagement
3.2: Least Cost Development Plan Pipeline ASA:
prepared, including demand forecast. • Strengthening energy sector monitoring and
planning capacity in STP (P155621)
• Baseline (2017): No
• Target (2020): Yes
3.3: Energy Household and Enterprise
access/consumption survey prepared.
• Baseline (2017): No
• Target (2020): Yes
3.4: Completion and endorsement of
Management Improvement Plan of
EMAE.
• Baseline (2017): No
• Target (2020): Yes
Revised CPS Outcome 4: Improved business environment, with a focus on tourism and SMEs
Major strides were made in improving business regulation and strengthening the financial sector. However, much more needs to be done to improve ease of
doing business, open access to credit, particularly to micro, small, and medium enterprises to develop their business, and to spur sustainable tourism. On the
financial sector side, the starting point was the World Bank-supported FSDIP, adopted by the Government in September 2016 to provide a coherent vision and
strategy for financial sector development. The FSDIP is followed by two FIRST-funded TA projects on banking resolution (essential for strengthening financial
stability) and payment systems. The Bank Resolution Support Project supports the central bank (BCSTP) in improving financial stability by increasing
supervisory capacity for off- and on- site supervision and by strengthening the regulatory framework for bank resolution. The Payment Systems Strengthening
TA includes actions that promote retail payments and mobile financial services for inclusion. Through the multi-GP Institutional Capacity Building Project,
the WBG supports actions to strengthen institutional capacity for financial stability and inclusion, public financial management, land registration, and statistics.
These include activities to strengthen the central bank’s capacity in supervision and bank resolution: a demand-side survey of how individuals and small
enterprises source their income and manage their finances; investments in financial infrastructure, including enhancements to the public credit registry
(hardware, software, and a disaster recovery site) and movable collateral registry; capacity strengthening for public financial management, particularly in
revenue forecasting, expenditure controls, and oversight of SOEs; support to the modernization of the land registry; and support to the development of data
access and information policies and dissemination practices, including through financing enhancements to the statistical agency’s website and technical
assistance on micro-data anonymization and annual production and distribution of statistical abstracts. The project will explore opportunities for public
institutions to learn on-the-job, including through partnerships with similar organizations from more developed countries. The WBG plans to continue its
support to the tourism and financial sector during the remainder of the revised CPS period through ASA. The STP Investment Climate Project, an IFC Advisory
Services project, supported improvements in business regulations, trade facilitation and tourism development. Improvements supported by this project include
32
<<<PDF_PAGE_33>>>
Revised CPS Indicators (FY14–FY20) Supplementary Indicators WBG Engagement
an electronic platform for starting a business, reform of construction permit regulations and property registration fees, technical advice on the implementation
of an electronic single window for trade and risk management procedures at customs, advice on introducing electronic visas, and development of a tourism
strategy.
Revised CPS Indicator 4.1: Number of tourists: Indicator 4.1: Tourism strategy Completed ASA:
developed: • South-South Experience Exchange Facility TF:
• Baseline (2012): 5,000** Building Capacity for Digitization of property registry
• Target (2020): 25,000 • Baseline (2014): No strategy • STP Investment Climate Project (IFC Advisory
• Target (2020): Strategy in place Services)
**Note: Updated baseline figure from the original CPS, • IFC-Investment Climate Reform Plan
with newly available statistics for 2012 from the Indicator 4.2: Tourism inventory
Tourism Directorate conducted for 6 districts of STP: P i p e l i n e A S A :
• Country Economic Memorandum (P164180)
• Baseline (2014) Tourism
inventory does not exist
• Target (2020) Tourism inventory
exists
Indicator 4.3: Tourist exit survey
conducted:
• Baseline (2017): 0
• Target (2020): 4
Indicator 4.5: Number of days
required to obtain a construction
permit:
• Baseline (2014): 118
• Target (2020): 90
Revised CPS Indicator 4.2: Private sector savings from Indicator 4.6: Time to import and Completed ASA:
trade logistics reforms: export (border compliance) • SSKE- Strengthening Trade and Investment
Promotion Agency
• Baseline (2014): 0
• Target: (2020) US$1.3 million • Baseline (2014): export 115 Ongoing Financing:
hours; import 163 hours • Institutional Capacity Building Project (Finance,
PFM and Trade) (P162129)
• Target (2020): export 90 hours;
import 150 hours Ongoing ASA:
33
<<<PDF_PAGE_34>>>
Revised CPS Indicators (FY14–FY20) Supplementary Indicators WBG Engagement
• STP Bank Resolution and Payment System
Strengthening (P159937) (FIRST TF – World Bank
executed)
Revised CPS Indicator 4.3: All banks share data with Indicator 4.7: All Banks meet the
the credit registry. minimum Capital Adequacy Ratio
(CAR) required by the Central Bank
• Baseline (2017) only a few banks provide
information • Baseline (2017) percentage of
• Target (2020) all banks provide information banks with CAR greater or equal
to 10% is 86 in 2015 and 100 in
2016.
• Target (2020) 100 in 2017, 2018
and 2019.
Revised CPS Indicator 4.4: Share of the population with Ongoing ASA:
access to formal financial services (I.e. transaction • STP Bank Resolution and Payment System
accounts). Strengthening (P159937) (FIRST TF – World Bank
Overall Access executed)
• Baseline (2017): 39 percent
• Target (2020): 45 percent Ongoing Financing:
Women Access • STP Institutional Capacity Building Project
• Baseline (2017): 15 percent (162129)
• Target (2020): 20 percent
Revised CPS Theme 2: Strengthening Human Capacity and Reducing Vulnerability
STP made considerable progress enhancing human capital in its efforts towards the MDGs, but challenges remain. To increase growth and inclusion, the
country needs to become more strategic in its investments in human capital, including through a better performing education sector, more effective and targeted
safety nets, and adequate instruments for adaptation to climate change of vulnerable populations. Better trained teachers and stronger supervision of schools
are needed to improve the quality of education. In addition, to develop a more effective social protection system, accurate targeting and management systems
need to improve. Thus, a good statistics system is critical to provide both data for adequate targeting and measure impacts of interventions for service delivery
more broadly. At the same time, clear links between safety nets’ beneficiaries and skills development initiatives need to be established to enhance the
productivity and employability of poor households. Finally, the adaptive capacity to climate change of coastal communities, among the most vulnerable, needs
to be increased while reducing the potential loss of assets and lives. Considering ongoing and planned support by other DPs such as AfDB, the EC and the UN
agencies, the WBG will support this revised CPS focus area to achieve reforms in education and skills strengthening, SP and adaptive capacity of coastal
communities through IPFs, the DPO series and ASA.
34
<<<PDF_PAGE_35>>>
Revised CPS Indicators (FY14–FY20) Supplementary Indicators WBG Engagement
Revised CPS Outcome 5: Enhanced education quality
STP has achieved almost universal access to primary education, literacy rates are above 95 percent and progression to secondary education is 100 percent.
However, quality is low. To tap into the potential to accelerate growth offered by tourism and agriculture, STP would need to strengthen its skill base to better
respond to market needs. To enhance quality of education, the World Bank is supporting the improvement of teacher training and school supervision. The
World Bank has just approved the Social Protection and Skills Project, but results will only be shown during the next CPF period. World Bank support will
continue to be channeled through IPFs, the DPO series and ASA (PER).
Revised CPS Indicator 5.1: Qualified primary teachers Ongoing Financing:
resulting from projects • Quality Education for All Project(P146877)
• AF GPE for Quality Education for All (FY19)
• Baseline (2014): 40% (P150828)
• Target (2020): 75% •Social Protection and Skills Development Project
(P163088)
Revised CPS Indicator 5.2: Memorandum of Ongoing ASA:
Understanding signed between education and social • GPE TF for sector analysis and updated Education
protection ministries, outlining key principles of Sector Plan
collaboration for the gradual introduction of cash
transfers for girls education and preventing early Pipeline Financing:
pregnancy, including data-sharing.
• STP Girls Empowerment and Quality Education for
• Baseline: No intersectoral agreements in place to All (FY20) (P169222)
address girls’ education and prevent early
pregnancy through cash transfers
• Target 2020: Agreement signed
Revised CPS Indicator 5.3: Percentage of primary Ongoing Financing:
schools benefitting from annual supervision: • Quality Education for All Project (P146877)
• Baseline (2014): 0% Ongoing ASA:
• Target (2020): 100% • GPE TF for sector analysis and updated Education
Sector Plan
Pipeline Financing:
• STP Girls Empowerment and Quality Education for
All (FY20) (P169222)
35
<<<PDF_PAGE_36>>>
Revised CPS Indicators (FY14–FY20) Supplementary Indicators WBG Engagement
Revised CPS Outcome 6: Improved poverty targeting and access to social safety nets for vulnerable groups
Poverty reduction in STP implies measures to protect vulnerable communities and promote economic opportunities. Coverage of SP programs should increase
and to do that, it is important to develop and operationalize the basic blocks for a Social Protection System, including an accurate targeting system, a payment
system and a Management Information System to improve cost-efficiency and effectiveness of programs. A good statistics system is critical to provide data
for adequate targeting and measure impacts of interventions.
Revised CPS Indicator 6.1: Statistical Capacity Score: 6.1: Preparation of Household Survey Pipeline ASA:
• Poverty Assessment (P167907)
• Baseline (2017): 70 • Baseline (2017): 3rd Household
• Target (2020): 73 Survey is not completed.
• Target (2020): 3rd Household
Survey is completed.
6.2: Poverty Assessment
• Baseline (2017): N/A
• Target (2020): Concluded
Revised CPS Indicator 6.2: Number of beneficiaries 6.3: Number of households registered Completed ASA:
enrolled in the new programs: in the Social Registry: • Social Protection Rapid Social Response TF
• Building Blocks for SP System
• Baseline (2017): 0 • Baseline (2014): 0 • Poverty maps, Proxy Means Test and Poverty
• Target (2020): 4,000 (Cash Transfer + Social • Target (2020): 4,400 Assessment; Management Information System;
Pension) Communication Strategy
Ongoing ASA:
• Development of effective delivery systems for Social
Protection (P163445)
• GFDDR-TF (50k) to develop guidance for the
implementation of a public works program.
Ongoing Financing:
• Social Protection and Skills Development Project
(P163088)
36
<<<PDF_PAGE_37>>>
Revised CPS Indicators (FY14–FY20) Supplementary Indicators WBG Engagement
Revised CPS Outcome 7: Increased adaptive capacity of coastal communities and reduced potential of loss of lives and assets
During the revised CPS period the WBG will contribute to increasing adaptive capacity of vulnerable coastal communities, with increased awareness through
participatory mapping as well as piloting adaptation strategies, combining soft and hard protection works, in addition to voluntary relocation of population to
safer areas. For coastal communities, another critical challenge is the adoption of safer practices by fishermen who are facing increasing risks. The World Bank
is promoting activities that disseminate better information on weather, as well as provide safety equipment to manage these risks. Thus, saving lives and
reducing the loss of assets that trap these communities in poverty. Through financing and ASA, the WBG is also helping STP to address its vulnerability to
natural disasters and climate change in coordination with other West African countries.
Revised CPS Indicator 7.1: Proportion of fishing 7.1: Artisanal fishermen are trained Completed ASA:
population benefiting from training and equipment for and have received basic safety at sea • Adaptation to Climate Change (P111669)
safety at sea. equipment:
• Baseline (2014): 0% • Baseline (2014):0% Ongoing Financing:
• Target (2018): 70% • Target (2020): 70% • WACA (P162337)
Revised CPS Indicator 7.2: Fishermen deaths at sea
caused by extreme weather conditions:
• Baseline (2017):4.8 per year
• Target (2020): less than 1 per year
37
<<<PDF_PAGE_38>>>
Annex 2: Changes to original CPS Results Matrix
Original CPS Results Matrix Updated CPS Results Matrix Comments
Theme One: Supporting Macroeconomic Revised CPS Theme One: To reflect larger emphasis on
Stability and National Competitiveness Supporting Macroeconomic inclusive growth and new
Stability and Inclusive Growth priorities in reduction of its
associated bottlenecks.
Outcome 1. Strengthened public financial Revised CPS Outcome 1: To specify indicators around fiscal
and natural resource management Increased fiscal revenues and revenues and stronger
improved quality of public management of public
expenditures expenditures
Indicator 1.1: Availability of budget Moved to become supplementary
information to the public: Indicator 1.2.
• Baseline: (2013): 2 out of 6 types of (identical with revised target date
budget information under PEFA of 2020)
methodology made available to the
public within one month of their
completion.
• Target (2017): At least 5 out of the 6
types of budget information made
available within one month.
Indicator 1.2: Preparation, auditing and Inserted as supplementary
presentation of State Annual Financial Indicator 1.1.
Statements for legislative scrutiny:
2020 target
• Baseline (2013): Annual Statement
for 2010 submitted for audit.
• Target (2017) Annual Statement
prepared, audited, and presented to
Parliament within 15 months after
close of fiscal year.
Indicator 1.3: Percentage of direct contracting Dropped. No WBG activities will contribute to
in procurement: achievement of the indicator.
However, will coordinate with
• Baseline (2013): 29% of all AfDB, which is working in this
contracts. important area.
• Target (2017): 10% of all contracts.
Revised CPS Indicator 1.1 was Indicator is added to better align with
added: "Tax revenues as share of new DPO series and with special
GDP". Baseline (2014): 14.3 %; themes of IDA18.
target (2020): 15.8 %
Supplementary indicator 1.1:
Preparation, auditing, and
presentation of State Annual
Financial Statements for legislative
scrutiny:
• Baseline (2013): Annual
statement for 2010
submitted for audit.
• Target (2020): Annual
statement prepared,
audited, and presented
38
<<<PDF_PAGE_39>>>
Original CPS Results Matrix Updated CPS Results Matrix Comments
within 15 months after
close of fiscal year.
Supplementary indicator 1.2:
Availability of budget information
to the public:
• Baseline (2013): 2 out of
6 types of budget
information under PEFA
methodology made
available to the public
within one month of their
completion.
• Target (2020): At least 5
out of 6 types of budget
information made
available within one
month.
Supplementary indicator 1.3: Share
of ongoing and finalized projects
with basic information included in
the National Investment Portfolio
Database:
• Baseline (2014): 0 %
• Target (2020): 100%
Indicator 1.4: Existence of debt management Revised CPS Indicator 1.2: Indicator is added to better align with
strategy: "Number of Debt Performance new DPO series and with special
Indicators (DPI) with a score of themes of IDA18.
• Baseline (2013): No strategy. “D” per DeMPA methodology:
• Target (2017): Medium-term debt • Baseline (2016): 27 out of
strategy publicly available. 33
• Target (2020): 23 out of
33
Supplementary indicator 1.4:
Existence of a debt management
strategy:
• Baseline (2013): No
strategy in place
• Target (2020): Updated
medium-term debt
strategy publicly
available
* In the DeMPA methodology, a score of D indicates that the minimum requirement has not been achieved, which signals a deficiency in
performance, normally requiring priority corrective action.
Indicator 1.5: Public disclosure of new fishing Revised CPS Outcome 2: A new CPS outcome became
agreements and licenses within one month of Strengthened SOE and Extractive dedicated to governance and
signing agreements or issuing licenses: Industries governance and transparency of SOE and extractive
improved transparency.
39
<<<PDF_PAGE_40>>>
Original CPS Results Matrix Updated CPS Results Matrix Comments
• Baseline (2013): not disclosed. industries. Baselines and targets were
• Target (2017): Routinely disclosed. Indicator 2.2: Public disclosure of modified to make them more
new fishing agreements and specific.
licenses within one month of
signing agreements or issuing
licenses:
• Baseline (2014): 0%
• Target (2020): 100%
Indicator 1.6: Improved accountability in oil Revised CPS Outcome 2:
sector governance: Strengthened SOE and Extractive
Industries governance and
• Baseline (2013): EITI reconciliation improved transparency.
report.
• Target (2017): EITI reconciliation Indicator 2.3: Improved
report publicly available and accountability in oil sector
disseminated in the country. governance:
• Baseline (2013): EITI
reconciliation report.
• Target (2017): EITI
reconciliation report
publicly available and
disseminated in the
country.
Outcome 2: Enhanced statistical system Revised Outcome 6: Improved Household survey will improve
poverty targeting and access to targeting of social programs. Targets
social safety nets for vulnerable are stronger and more specific.
groups.
Indicator 6.1: Statistical Capacity
Score:
• Baseline (2017): 70
• Target (2020): 73
Indicator 2.1: Population and Housing Census: Revised Outcome 6: Improved The Population and Housing survey
poverty targeting and access to was completed in 2012 and
• Baseline ((2013): Not completed. social safety nets for vulnerable disseminated in different formats
• Target (2017): Completed and report groups: between 2013-2014.
published summarizing main A new Household survey was
findings. Supplementary Indicator 6.1: included in the new DPO series, and
Preparation of Household Survey: benefits from TFs.
• Baseline (2017): No
household survey
• Target (2020): Household
survey finished and
disseminated
40
<<<PDF_PAGE_41>>>
Original CPS Results Matrix Updated CPS Results Matrix Comments
Outcome 3: Improved private sector Revised CPS Outcome 4: All the outcomes and indicators
capacity with a focus on the tourism sector Improved business environment, related to the improvement of the
and SMEs with a focus on tourism and business environment for tourism
SMEs. Many indicators, and SMEs were merged in the
milestones, and baselines and Revised CPS Outcome 4, including
targets were revised. business regulations, banking and
tourism sector-related activities.
Indicator 3.1: Medium-term tourism Supplementary Indicator 4.1:
development strategy with an Action Plan: “Tourism strategy developed”:
• Baseline (2013): Not prepared. • Baseline (2014): No
• Target (2017): Adopted and being strategy.
implemented. • Target (2020): Strategy in
place.
Indicator 3.2: Number of entities engaged in Dropped. Project that was supporting these
provision of tourism services: activities and indicators was
dropped.
• Baseline ((2013): 300 approx.
• Target (2017) 400 approx.
Indicator 3.3: Occupancy of private sector Revised CPS Indicator 4.1: To better reflect objectives of the
tourist capacities (tourist-days per year): Number of tourist arrivals. current projects as original project
was dropped. It summarizes changes
• Baseline (2013): 91,000 approx. • Baseline (2012): 12,743 produced by several supplementary
• Target (2017): 140,000 approx. • Target (2020): 25,000. indicators: indicator 4.1: tourist
arrivals 4.2: online visa issuance
Supplementary Indicator 4.1: enabled; milestone indicator 4.3:
Tourism strategy developed: tourism inventory conducted for 6
districts of STP; and indicator 4.4:
• Baseline (2014): No strategy tourist exit survey conducted
• Target (2020): Strategy in
place
Supplementary Indicator 4.2:
Tourism inventory conducted for 6
districts of STP:
• Baseline (2014) Tourism
inventory does not exist.
• Target (2020) Tourism
inventory exists.
Supplementary Indicator 4.3:
Tourist exit survey conducted:
• Baseline (2017): 0
• Target (2020): 4
Indicator 3.4: Number of entrepreneurs Dropped. Indicator 3.4 was based on a project
receiving business development services (40% that was dropped.
women)
• Baseline (2013): 0
41
<<<PDF_PAGE_42>>>
Original CPS Results Matrix Updated CPS Results Matrix Comments
• Target (2017): Up to 300
individuals/SMEs supported to
develop business plans and benefit
from IFC Business Edge training
Indicator 3.5: Number of microenterprises and Dropped Indicator 3.5 was based on a project
SMEs benefiting from access to finance that was dropped.
because of business plan development and
IFC’s SME risk sharing program:
• Baseline (2013?): 0
• Target (2017): 100-150 SMEs
Indicator 3.6: Number of private sector Dropped. Indicator 3.6 was based on a project
employees benefiting from training (50% that was dropped.
women):
• Baseline (2013): 0
• Target (2017): 300 employees
Outcome 4: Improved business Revised CPS Outcome 4:
environment and trade regulations Improved business environment,
with a focus on tourism and
SMEs
Indicator 4.1: Number of days required to Supplementary Indicator 4.5: CPS indicator becomes a
obtain a construction permit: supplementary one.
• Baseline (2013): 118
• Baseline (2013): 118 • Target (2020): 90
• Target (2017): 90
Indicator 4.2: Average cost of compliance To make indicator more specific.
with business regulations (as percent of per Supplementary Indicator 4.5:
capita income): Number of days required to obtain
a construction permit:
• Baseline (2013): 386
• Target (2017): <200 • Baseline (2014): 118
Target (2020): 90
Indicator 4.3: Number of days to export and Revised CPS Indicator 4.2: Private To make milestone more specific.
import: sector savings from trade logistics
reforms:
• Baseline (2013): export 26; import
28 • Baseline (2014): 0
• Target (2017): <16 • Target: (2020) US$1.3 million
Supplementary indicator 4.6:
Number of days to export and
import:
• Baseline (2014): export
26; import 28.
• Target (2020): <16
42
<<<PDF_PAGE_43>>>
Original CPS Results Matrix Updated CPS Results Matrix Comments
Revised CPS Indicator 4.3: All
banks share data with the credit
registry.
• Baseline (2017) only a few
banks provide information.
• Target (2020) all banks
provide information.
Supplementary Indicator 4.7: All
Banks meet the minimum Capital
Adequacy Ratio (CAR) required
by the Central Bank
• Baseline (2017) percentage of
banks with CAR greater or
equal to 10% is 86 in 2015
and 100 in 2016.
• Target (2020) 100 in 2017,
2018 and 2019.
Revised CPS Indicator 4.4: Share
of the population with access to
formal financial services (I.e.
transaction accounts).
Overall
• Baseline (2017): 39 percent
• Target (2020): 45 percent
Women’s Access
• Baseline (2017): 15 percent
• Target (2020): 20 percent
Outcome 5: Better targeting of energy Revised CPS Outcome 3: ICT, energy and transport sectors
subsidies Improved performance of the were combined in Revised CPS
infrastructure sector (ICT, outcome 3 as they represent the main
energy and transport) infrastructure constraints to inclusive
growth
43
<<<PDF_PAGE_44>>>
Original CPS Results Matrix Updated CPS Results Matrix Comments
Indicator 5.1: Tariff rates and targeting of Revised CPS Indicator 3.2: No change
subsidies: EMAE’s technical and non-
technical losses
• Baseline: (2013): Tariff rates not
changed since 2007 and only 40% of • Baseline (2017): 40%
electricity subsidies reach the poor • Target (2020): 34%
• Target (2017): Identification of a
reform strategy to bring tariff rates Supplementary Indicator 3.1:
closer to cost recovery while Hydropower capacity rehabilitated:
improving the targeting of subsidies
• Baseline (2017: 0MW
• Target (2020): 2MW
Supplementary Indicator 3.2: Least
Cost Development Plan prepared,
including demand forecast.
• Baseline (2017): No
• Target (2020): Yes
Supplementary Indicator 3.3:
Energy Household and Enterprise
access/consumption survey
prepared.
• Baseline (2017): No
• Target (2020): Yes
Supplementary Indicator 3.4:
Completion and endorsement of
Management Improvement Plan of
EMAE.
• Baseline (2017): No
• Target (2020): Yes
Outcome 6: Improved regional broadband Revised CPS Outcome 3: ICT, energy and transport sectors
connectivity Improved performance of the were combined in Revised CPS
infrastructure sector (ICT, energy outcome 3 as they represent the main
and transport) infrastructure constraints to inclusive
growth
Indicator 6.1: Retail price of internet services Revised CPS indicator 3.1: Retail Target well achieved (retail price
(per Mbps monthly): price of internet services: now US$52).
• Baseline (2012): US$410 • Baseline (2014): US$410
• Target (2014): US$340 • Target (2020): US$340
Theme Two: Reduced vulnerability and Revised CPS Theme Two:
strengthened human capacity Strengthening human capacity
and reducing vulnerability
Outcome 7: Improved poverty targeting Revised CPS Outcome 6: Combines poverty targeting with
Improved poverty targeting and programs to improve social safety
access to social safety nets for nets with more precision
vulnerable groups
44
<<<PDF_PAGE_45>>>
Original CPS Results Matrix Updated CPS Results Matrix Comments
Indicator 7.1. (Exact indicator for improved Revised CPS indicator 6.2: Indicators added to account for new
poverty targeting to be determined based on Number of beneficiaries enrolled social protection policy and strategy
findings and decisions on completion of in the new programs:
ongoing social protection policy and strategy)
• Baseline (2017): 0
• Target (2020): 4,000
(Cash Transfer + Social
Pension)
Supplementary indicator 6.2:
number of households registered in
Social Registry:
• Baseline (2014): 0
• Target (2020): 4,400
Indicator 7.2: Jobs created through targeted Dropped
Public Works Program (PWP):
• Baseline and target to be determined
once details of the PWP are designed
Outcome 8: Increased adaptive capacity of Revised CPS Outcome 7:
coastal communities and reduced potential Increased capacity of coastal
of loss of assets and lives communities and reduced
potential of loss of lives and
assets.
Indicator 8.1: Proportion of fishing population Revised CPS indicator 7.1: Revised to provide a better
benefiting from early warning system and Proportion of fishing population measurement of the outcome.
safety at sea (%): benefiting from training and
equipment for safety at sea:
• Baseline (2013): 0%
• Target (2016): 70% • Baseline (2014): 0%
• Target (2018): 70%
Revised CPS indicator 7.2:
Fishermen deaths at sea due to
extreme weather conditions
• Baseline (2017): 4.8 per
year
• Target (2020): less than 1
per year
Outcome 9: Improved training of teachers Revised CPS Outcome 5:
in primary education Enhanced education quality and
skills
Indicator 9.1: Percent of qualified primary Revised CPS indicator 5.1: Indicator revised to better reflect
teachers resulting from project: Qualified primary teachers objective of the project and target
resulting from projects: revised to make it more realistic.
• Baseline (2013): 40 %
• Target (2017): 75% • Baseline (2014): 40%
• Target (2020): 75%
Indicator 9.2: Percent of primary schools
benefiting from annual supervision:
• Baseline (2013): 0%
45
<<<PDF_PAGE_46>>>
Original CPS Results Matrix Updated CPS Results Matrix Comments
• Target (2017): 100%
Outcome 10: Increased access to skills Revised CPS Outcome 5:
development Enhanced education quality and
skills
Indicator 11.1: To be determined based on Dropped
findings of Skills Strategy and selected area of
WBG support. Baseline (2014): TBD; Target
(2018): TBD
Cross-cutting Theme: Gender, Partnership,
and Capacity Building
46
<<<PDF_PAGE_47>>>
Annex 3: Progress toward FY14-18 CPS Outcomes
CPS Outcomes Milestones Status
Theme 1: Supporting Macroeconomic Stability and National Competitiveness
Outcome 1: Strengthened Public Partially on track.
Financial and Natural Resource Outcome 1 consists of 6
Management indicators, of which 4 have
been achieved.
Indicator 1: Availability of budget • Annual financial statements prepared and On track. A PEFA was
information to the public. submitted to Tribunal of Accounts for audit. conducted and published in
Baseline (2013): 2 out of 6 types of • Audit completed and presented to the October 2013, indicating
budget information under PEFA Parliament for that 4 out of the 6
methodology made available to the Performance Indicators
legislative scrutiny and audit report
public within one month of their published. (PI-10) were made public
completion. in a timely manner.
• Targeted PFM training/ seminars for
Target (2017): At least 5 out of 6
parliamentarians
types of budget information
conducted.
made available within one month.
• Debt legislation provides clear
authorization to borrow, issue new debt,
undertake debt-related transactions, and issue
loan guarantees.
• EITI Reconciliation
Report adopted.
Indicator 2: Preparation, auditing, Partially on track
and presentation of
State annual financial statements for
legislative scrutiny
Baseline (2013): Annual statement
for 2010 submitted for
Audit.
Target (2017): Annual statement
prepared, audited, and
presented within 15 months after
close of fiscal year.
Indicator 3: Percentage of direct Off track. Not monitored
contracting in systematically. To be
Procurement. dropped because this result
Baseline (2012): 29% of all is not directly supported by
contracts. World Bank activities.
Target (2018): 10% of all contracts.
Indicator 4: Existence of a debt On track. A formal debt
management strategy management strategy has
Baseline (2013): No strategy in been developed and is in
place. place.
Target (2017): Medium-term debt
strategy publicly available.
Indicator 5: Public disclosure of On track. All current
new fishing agreements fishing agreements and a
and licenses within one month of registry of fishing licenses
signing agreements or are made accessible to the
issuing licenses public through the Official
Baseline (2013): Not disclosed. Gazette on a regular and
Target (2017): Routinely disclosed. timely basis.
47
<<<PDF_PAGE_48>>>
Indicator 6: Improved On track.
accountability in oil sector
governance
Baseline (2013): EITI reconciliation
Report.
Target (2017): EITI Reconciliation
Report publicly available
and disseminated in the country.
Outcome 2: Enhanced statistical On track. Outcome 2
system consists of one indicator,
that has been achieved.
New indicator being added.
Indicator: Population and housing Population and
census. housing census
Baseline (2013): Not completed completed (2014).
(2013)
Target (2014): Census completed,
and report published
summarizing main findings.
Outcome 3: Improved private Off track. Outcome 3 has
sector capacity with a focus on the 6 indicators, five of which
tourism sector and SMEs are off track and one on
track.
Indicator 1: Medium-term tourism • National business plan competition On track. Wording of
development strategy conducted. indicator revised to
with an Action Plan. • Tourism Strategy’s Action Plan revised and “tourism strategy
Baseline (2013): Not prepared. prioritized. developed”. The Tourism
Target (2017): Adopted and being • Strategic tourism marketing plan Strategic Plan was
implemented. prepared and implemented. launched in February 2018.
Number of tourism arrivals
• Online visa issuance enabled.
in 2017 was 28,948.
• Tourism Tax Law created and
Indicator 2: Number of entities Off track. To be dropped
implemented.
engaged in provision of because this result is not
• Number of tourists increased from 5,000
tourism services. directly supported by
(2012) to 25,000 (2017).
Baseline (2013): 300 approx. WBG activities.
Target (2017): 400
Indicator 3: Occupancy of private Off track. To be dropped
sector tourist capacities because this result is not
(tourist-days per year) directly supported by
Baseline (2013): 91,000 approx. WBG activities.
Target (2017): 140,000
Indicator 4: Number of Off track. To be dropped
entrepreneurs receiving business because this result is not
development services (40% women) directly supported by
Baseline (2013): 0 WBG activities.
Target (2017): Up to 300
individuals/ SMEs supported to
develop business plans and benefit
from IFC Business
Edge training
Indicator 5: Number of micro- Off track. To be dropped
enterprises and SMEs because this result is not
benefitting from access to finance directly supported by
because of business plan WBG activities.
48
<<<PDF_PAGE_49>>>
development and IFC’s MSME risk
sharing program.
Baseline (?): 0
Target (2017): 100-150 MSMEs.
Indicator 6: Number of private Off track. To be dropped
sector employees benefitting from because this result is not
training (50% women) directly supported by
Baseline (?): 0 WBG activities.
Target (2017): 300 employees
Outcome 4: Improved business Partially on Track.
environment and Outcome 4 has 3
trade regulations indicators, one of which
was achieved and one was
partially achieved.
Indicator 1: Number of days •Online business registration and other Partially achieved. New
required to obtain a online commercial registry features construction permit
construction permit operational. regulations were issued.
Baseline (2013): 118 • Single window for trade established and Comparisons between
Target (2017): 90 fully operational. published DB data for
2013 and 2017 are no
• Modernization of trade-related regulations
longer possible due to
initiated, particularly those related to
changes in the DB
nontariff barriers.
methodology; using
comparable data under the
new methodology the time
to obtain construction
permits dropped by 9.4%
between 2013 and 2017
according to DB.
Indicator 2: Average cost of Partially achieved. New
compliance with business construction permit
regulations (as percent of per capita regulations were issued.
income) Comparisons between
Baseline (2013): 386 published DB data for
Target (2017): <200 2013 and 2017 no longer
possible due to changes in
the DB methodology;
using comparable data
under the new DB
methodology the cost to
obtain construction permits
dropped by 26% between
2013 and 2017 according
to DB.
Indicator 3: Number of days to Partially on track. Because
export and import of the trade reform "single
Baseline (2013): export 26; import window for international
28. trade" and related
Target (2017): <16 streamlining of import
export procedures the time
to import dropped by 14%
and to export by 18%
between 2014 and 2017.
Comparisons of DB 2013
data (used as baseline) and
DB2017 data are no longer
49
<<<PDF_PAGE_50>>>
possible due to changes in
methodology.
Outcome 5: Better targeting of On track. Outcome 5 has
energy subsidies one indicator which is on
track.
Indicator: Tariff rates and targeting On track. The Energy
of subsidies survey has been completed
Baseline (2013): Tariff rates not and the MTF team is now
changed since 2007 and only working on the final report
40% of electricity subsidies actually to be disseminated in May
reach the poor 2019. Preliminary results
Target (2019): Identification of a have been used to define
reform strategy to bring tariff schemes. Tariff study
tariff rates closer to cost recovery will be launched in 2nd half
while improving the of CY 2018. The EMAE
targeting of subsidies Management Improvement
Plan has been prepared and
is pending formal
endorsement of GoSTP.
Procurement of
Consultants for EMAE
Management Information
System is ongoing.
Outcome 6: Improved regional On track. Outcome 6 has
broadband connectivity one indicator which has
been achieved, and
surpassed.
Indicator: Retail price of internet On track and will surpass
services (per Mbps monthly) largely the targets. Retail
Baseline (2012): US$410. price of internet services
Target (2014): US$340. has dropped radically to
US$52 per Mbit/s per
month. Competition has
increased, and connectivity
has improved significantly
for both internet and
telecom services.
Theme 2: Reduced Vulnerability and Strengthened Human Capacity
Outcome 7: Improved poverty Partially on track.
targeting Outcome 7 has two
indicators, of which one is
on track and one is off
track.
Indicator 1: (Exact indicator for • Assessment of social protection programs On track. A targeting
improved poverty targeting to be completed. methodology and a Social
determined based on findings and • Core interventions for a social safety nets Registry were developed.
decisions on completion of ongoing system identified. All Social Protection
social protection policy and beneficiaries (over 31,000
• Social protection strategy adopted.
strategy) households) were
• Key operational tools (targeting system
registered in the Social
and
Registry.
registry of beneficiaries) developed.
• Core social sector programs approved by
the Government.
50
<<<PDF_PAGE_51>>>
Indicator 2: Jobs created though Partially on track. Public
targeted Public Works Program works program and
(PWP) operational manual were
(Baseline and target to be developed. Government
determined once details of the lacks funds to start
PWP are designed) implementation of the
Public Works Program.
Outcome 8: Increased adaptive On track. Outcome 8
capacity of coastal consists of one indicator
communities and reduced which is on track, with
potential loss of assets and most physical targets
lives achieved, some surpassed.
Indicator: Proportion of fishing • Coastal adaptation/protection measures On track. The safety at sea
population benefiting implemented. program combined with an
from early warning system and • Flooding exposure of target communities early warning system has
safety at sea (%) helped reduce mortality at
reduced by two-thirds through coastal
Baseline (2013): 0%. adaptation measures. sea by about 80 percent
Target (2016): 70%. relative to the 2006-10
•Training and awareness campaigns on safety-
baseline (prior to the
at-sea provided
introduction of the system).
• Safety at sea equipment distributed
However, the number of
fishermen has been
increasing rapidly and
safety at sea training needs
to continue during the the
WACA project.
Outcome 9: Improved training of On track. Outcome 9 has
teachers in primary two indicators of which
education one is achieved (primary
schools with annual
supervision) and one is on
track (qualified primary
teachers).
Indicator 1: Percent of qualified At least one student assessment conducted On track. Teachers'
primary teachers for the target grades training plans have been
resulting from project • In-service primary program set up developed and the project
Baseline (2013): 40%. • Student learning assessment system design has been finalized.
Target (2019): 75%. A Teacher Qualifications
being developed
Framework and
• EMIS developed and functional
certification process is also
under development.
Indicator 2: Percentage of primary On track. The target
schools benefitting schools receive supervision
from annual supervision 4 times per year. The
Baseline: 0% (2013) Ministry has recruited 54
Target: 100% (2017) Instruction Leaders who
regularly pay visits to
primary schools.
Outcome 10: Increased access to Off track. Outcome 10 has
skills development one indicator which has not
been achieved.
Indicator: To be determined based Off track. A new milestone
on findings of Skills Strategy included.
and selected area for WBG support
51
<<<PDF_PAGE_52>>>
Cross-cutting Theme: Gender, Issues integrated into the
Partnership, and Capacity program
Building
52
<<<PDF_PAGE_53>>>
Annex 4: Planned and Actual Deliveries of Non-Lending Services (FY14-18)
CPS PLANS (05/2014) STATUS COMMENT
FY14-FY15
Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes, Delivered Review to help the Government identify measures to help
Accounting and Auditing enforcement of applicable laws and recommend
complimentary measures and actions delivered
Debt Strategy Reform Plan Delivered A formal debt strategy in place
Operationalizing the Social Protection Strategy Dropped Some analysis was taken over by the NLTA Building
(Programmatic AAA) Blocks for SP System.
Social Protection Rapid Social Response TF Delivered Renamed Building Blocks for SP System. Analysis on
Social Protection for redefinition of Social Protection
Programs and accurate beneficiary identification and
selection system developed
Skills Strategy Dropped The Social Protection and Skills Development Project will
undertake studies to inform the project
Agriculture Sector Issues Dropped The AfDB is taking the lead in this area, including on ASA
IFC- Investment Climate Reform Plan Delivered Renamed. Supports business environment reforms and
development of the tourism sector
PPIAF/IFC- Analysis on Development of Delivered Provided policy advice on the possible development of a
Transshipment and Overall Ports sector deep-sea port.
FY15-FY16
Small Island Public Procurement Strategy Dropped Changed client demand
WBI Courses and Seminars for Dropped Changed client demand
Parliamentarians
Strategy on Regional Integration and Trade Dropped Changed client demand
Facilitation
Policy Note on Public Spending Dropped
Financial Sector Development Strategy Delivered Developed a coherent vision and strategy for
(FIRST) financial sector development. The action plan is
under implementation
ADDITIONS to CPS PLANS (FY15-FY17) STATUS COMMENT
Power Sector Efficiency Improvement Delivered Studies for the reduction of electrical losses (technical and
non-technical) and improvement of reliability concluded
SSKE- Strengthening Trade and Investment Delivered Technicians from STP TIPA participated in capacity
Promotion Agency (TIPA) building activities in Maputo
SSKE- Building Capacity for Digitization of Delivered Technicians from STP Property Registry participated in a
property registry study tour to Cabo Verde, followed by a visit from an
expert Cabo Verdean consultant to STP to develop a
strategy for reform
53
<<<PDF_PAGE_54>>>
Annex 5: World Bank Group Support to the Energy Sector in STP
1. Electricity coverage in STP extends to only about half the population. Electricity
Access is more widespread among non-poor families (58.3 percent) than poorer families (47.5
percent). 38 percent of rural households do not have access to any source of electricity vs. 23
percent of urban households. While there is no available data on the quantity or duration of power
cuts, service quality is widely acknowledged as unreliable and extensive outages are frequent,
especially during periods of peak demand.
2. Electricity supply is constrained. In early 2016, EMAE interconnected generation asset
on São Tomé Island, including four diesel thermal power plants (São Tomé, Santo Amaro, and
Bobo-Forro 1 and 2) and two hydropower plants (Contador and Guégué) for a total capacity of
29.9 MW with only 15MW guaranteed. Most of the thermal generators have low efficiencies,
leading to high fuel consumption. Regarding hydropower on the island, Guégué has been out of
service since 2011, making Contador Hydropower Plant (2MW) the country’s only current source
of utility-scale renewable energy. In 2015, São Tomé relied on the Contador hydropower plant
for about 6.6 percent of its power but this share was reduced 5.5 percent in 2017. The
Government’s stated objective is reaching 40 percent renewable energy penetration by 2020. The
Power Sector Recovery Project (P169196) contributes to this objective by rehabilitating the
Contador plant and developing the Least Cost Development Plan (LCD).
3. The energy utility (EMAE) faces challenges related to management and commercial
viability. Two thirds of its current estimated 40 percent of losses were non-technical. These alone
are estimated to increase the overall cost of production of electricity by over a third, independent
of the energy source used. Therefore, despite high tariffs, EMAE is not able to recover energy
costs with its revenues and EMAE has accumulated arrears with the Government and suppliers.
It has also underinvested in the company, leading to low-quality service and high customer
dissatisfaction. The major commercial problem faced by EMAE is proper metering, billing, and
payment of the clients’ bills. Not all clients have meters and those who have are not measuring
electricity consumption properly because of their age. Thus, clients are billed by estimate or the
minimum amount. Furthermore, revenue collection in remote areas is challenging in the absence
of an EMAE payment point.
4. Through the second DPO series and the Power Sector Recovery Project, the WBG is
supporting an integrated and synergetic solution to energy issues in STP. While the Power
Sector Recovery Project supports the infrastructure and plans needed to revamp the energy sector
in STP such as the rehabilitation of the hydroelectric power plant, transmission lines, managerial
improvement plan for EMAE, the DPO focuses on the policies needed to enable these
improvements. For instance, the DPO supports the adoption of the LCD plan as the binding
mechanism to expand the power sector in STP. The DPO also supports measures with more
immediate effects on the finances of EMAE such as the change in commercial practices and the
inventory of government bills. It also supports the enactment of regulations that are foreseen in
legislation and were never implemented, which drafts are financed by the Power Sector Recovery
Project.
54
<<<PDF_PAGE_55>>>
5. The Power Sector Energy Efficiency Improvement TA contributed with studies for
the improvement of EMAE’s financial sustainability. It is also contributing to the
improvement of the quality of electricity services by reducing the system’s technical and non-
technical losses in the generation, transmission and distribution, and by promoting energy
efficiency programs on the demand side. A TA for Strengthening Energy Monitoring and
Planning, still ongoing, follows this up. It is aimed at improving monitoring and planning capacity
of the GoSTP in the energy sector and promote renewable energy development. The
recommendations of these studies are being taken up for implementation within the framework
of the Power Sector Recovery Project, including a reform strategy to bring tariff rates closer to
cost recovery while improving the targeting of subsidies.
6. PPIAF TF Project: Private Sector Participation Options to Foster Renewable
Energy: The overall objective of the TA is to enable the Government of STP to attract private
financing for low cost, low carbon but capital intensive hydropower and solar IPPs through review
of the effectiveness of the legislative framework, benchmark hydro and solar IPP projects in the
region and the sector's investment and capacity needs and to develop standard documentation for
IPPs. It is expected that there will be capacity building within the involved entities that would
enable them to continue the process of private sector participation and accomplish the Climate
Change goals and secure the energy supply of the country.
55
<<<PDF_PAGE_56>>>
Annex 6: World Bank Group Support to the Financial Sector in STP
1. In response to client demand, and in line with the GoSTP’s priorities, the WBG has
increased its engagement on the financial sector development in STP. The starting point was
the FSDIP, adopted by the Government in September 2016 to provide a coherent vision and
strategy for financial sector development. The FSDIP is followed by two FIRST-funded TA
projects on banking resolution (essential for strengthening financial stability) and payment
systems, which includes promoting retail payments and mobile financial services for inclusion
which are informing and advancing the reforms of the financial sector pillar of the new DPO
series. In FY18, the World Bank approved a new multi-GP Investment Lending Operation (IPF)
focused on strengthening institutional capacity for financial inclusion and stability, public
financial management, land registration, and statistics.
2. The World Bank Resolution Support Project financed by FIRST supports the central
bank (BCSTP) in improving financial stability, by increasing supervisory capacity for off- and
on- site supervision and strengthening the regulatory framework for bank resolution. The current
focus is on the regulatory framework for effective bank resolution. This will involve supporting
efforts by the BCSTP to prepare the regulations and guidelines necessary to implement the new
bank resolution law.
3. The Payment Systems Strengthening and Financial Inclusion Project, also financed
by FIRST, aims to support the GoSTP in improving financial inclusion and the overall efficiency
of the economy, by assisting the central bank in developing the national payments system,
improving its oversight and enhancing the legal framework to include all electronic payments and
services, supporting microfinance institutions, and strengthening financial consumer protection
as well as the credit information infrastructure. It supports a strategy for enhancing retail
payments including person-to-person, person-to-business, business-to-person, business-to-
business, person/business-to-government, and government-to-person/business payments
including by mobile platforms. It will lay the groundwork for investments in the national
payments system.
4. The Institutional Capacity Building Project is an IDA grant (US$12 million) that
provides a solid basis for a comprehensive multi-year operation to support implementation of the
FSDIP action plan. This IPF focuses on strengthening institutional capacity for financial inclusion
and stability, public financial management, land registration, and statistics. This includes
activities to strengthen the central bank’s capacity in supervision; support investments in financial
infrastructure, including enhancements to the public credit registry (hardware, software, and a
disaster recovery site) and movable collateral registry. It also includes a component to finance the
review of asset quality in the banking sector, which is an IMF structural benchmark. The Project
thus complements the TA being provided under the FIRST funded projects and also supports the
reform programs in the financial sector pillar of the DPO series.
56
<<<PDF_PAGE_57>>>
Annex 7: Select Financial Soundness Indicators
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 18-Sep
Capital Adequacy
Capital (net worth) to risk weighted assets 20.3% 22.7% 22.6% 24.1% 27.8% 33.6% 31.2%
Percentage of banks greater or equal to 10 percent 88% 75% 75% 86% 100% 100% 100%
Percentage of banks below 10 and above 6 percent minimum 0.0% 12.5% 12.5% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0%
Percentage of banks below 6 percent minimum 12.5% 12.5% 12.5% 14.3% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0%
Deposits w/banks below 6% (Dobra billion ) 83 59 325 455 0 0 0
Capital (net worth) to assets 23% 18% 20% 16% 23% 24% 21%
Tier 1 Capital Ratio 76% 68% 72% 62% 91% 94% 94%
Tier 2 Capital Ratio 24% 24% 15% 12% 9% 6% 6%
Tier 1 to assets 19% 21% 19%
Asset quality
Past-due loans to gross loans 67% 30% 36% 35% 31% 28% 23%
Nonperforming loans (Dobra billion) 292 310 329 570 438 401 305
Nonperforming loans 15.4% 16.9% 19.1% 29.8% 27.1% 24.9% 17.9%
Watch-listed loans 51% 14% 17% 5% 4% 3% 5%
Impaired assets/gross lending 7% 9% 9% 17% 16% 20% 15%
Provisions (Dobra Million) 242 512 345 516 380 378 317
Provision as percent of past-due loans 0% 56% 45% 69% 71% 80% 74%
Total assets (Dobra billion) 3,784 4,007 4,580 4,809 4,435 3,988 4,264
% change in total assets over past 12 months 28.7% 5.5% 14.3% 5.0% -7.8% -10.1% -0.1%
Foreign exchange loans to total loans 58% 54% 47% 42% 27% 17% 10%
Large exposures (>=10 % capital) to capital 48% 56% 45%
Foreign-currency-denominated loans to total loans 27% 17% 10%
Customer deposits to total (moninterbank) loans 158% 168% 172%
Earnings and profitability
Net Income to average assets (ROA) -0.83% -2.10% -3.15% -5.19% 0.03% -0.62% 0.70%
Net Income to average capital (ROE) -3.27% -9.33% -15.92% -27.05% 0.18% -2.98% 3.52%
Noninterest expense to gross income 80% 428% 110% 141.02% 73.69% 74.22% 72.28%
Personnel expense to gross income 25% 33% 39% 40% 31% 31% 32%
Noninterest income to gross income 58.32% 385.20% 59.74% 89% 55% 64% 58%
Net profit (Dobra Billion) -32 -82 -135 -226 2 -26 29
Net profit of prior 12 months as % of average total assets ** -1% -2% -3% -5.19% 0.03% -0.62% 0.70%
Expense(w/amortization & provisions)/income 118% 471% 164% 216% 109% 113% 92%
Net profit (before tax)/net income 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%
Net Interest Margin 68% 10% 11% 11% 11% 11% 9%
Net Interest Margin to Gross income 60% 60% 49% 51% 46% 51%
Personnel expense to noninterest expenses 32% 36% 34% 39% 41% 44%
Liquidity
Liquid assets/total assets 38% 41% 46% 52% 54% 50% 50%
Liquid assets/short term liabilities 61% 40% 73% 73% 85% 69% 66%
Loan/deposits 102% 86% 70% 64% 63% 60% 58%
Liquid Assets/total deposits 77% 76% 85% 83% 94% 73% 73%
Loan/total liabilities 65% 56% 47% 47% 47% 53% 51%
Excess reserves/broad money 8% 20% 19% 18% 37% 30% 76%
Sensitivity to market risk
Foreign exchange liabilities/total liabilities 31% 27% 28% 30% 27% 29% 25%
Foreign exchange liabilities to shareholders funds 105% 119% 110% 163% 91% 91% 92%
Foreign currency deposits/official reserves 85% 65% 69% 65% 61% 52% 53%
**During the year, accumulated in the period, not 12 months.
Source: Central Bank of STP, 2018.
57
<<<PDF_PAGE_58>>>
Annex 8: Improving Business Regulation in São Tomé and Príncipe
1. During the early years of the implementation of the STP FY14-FY18 CPS, major strides
were made in improving business regulation in STP. Two examples of success stories are: (1) the
one stop business registration; and (2) the single window for international trade. These reforms
were supported by the São Tomé Investment Climate Advisory Services project (IFC Advisory
Services #594467), which ran from January 2013 till June 2018.
The one-stop shop for business registration
2. The one-stop shop for business registration (the Guiché Único para Empresas, or GUE)
has been an important achievement in improving the investment climate and a major factor in
improving the country’s Doing Business (DB) ranking. The October 2015 DB report showed that
STP improved its rank in the Starting a Business indicator from 130th, before the reform, to 31st
out of the 189 economies measured then. Moreover, its absolute score on the ‘distance to the
frontier’ in this indicator has improved from 69.4/100 to 93.9/100, nearing the global best
practice.
3. The GUE was strengthened with the development of the GUEnet platform
(www.guenet.st), an information system for creating, modifying, and winding up a company.
GUEnet was formally launched in February 2016. Until June 2018, 830 companies had been
incorporated using the online system.
4. GUEnet combines three interfaces that automate key administrative procedures involved
in a company’s life cycle:
▪ Public front office: This part is visible to the public at large and allows users to conduct
searches on companies, regulations and more, as well as create their own accounts.
▪ Private front office: The part visible only to an individual user with his/her own
account. This is where the user is able to establish and modify companies.
▪ Back-office: Accessible only to GUE agents and other institutions connected with it.
This is where officials manage company creation and modification and interact with
users.
5. Before the reform, entrepreneurs would be required to conduct four separate steps, over a
period of 10 days, just to start a business. Today, they can save time and resources and start their
activities faster, incorporating in less than one hour using the GUEnet. Procedures such as the
name search and publication of the notice of incorporation have been fully automated. The name
search is conducted online, while the publication has been legally transferred from the paper
‘Diario da Republica’, which often took months to publish, to a simple online publication at the
GUE.
6. To complement the GUE, the Government has also launched the online business-licensing
portal (http://frontoffice.gue-stp.net/licence_choix.php5), which (a) allows users to find the
licenses they need to start various businesses and (b) advises users on how to go about obtaining
the licenses. This has increased overall transparency and reduced the time required to obtain
business licenses.
58
<<<PDF_PAGE_59>>>
The single window for international trade
7. The Government and the WBG, along with the Investment Climate Facility for Africa
(ICF), shared a vision for the modernization of the trade logistics system in the country: an online
single window for trade. However, to move from a complex paper-based system to a fully
electronic one would require a phased approach to ensure a sustainable reform. The WBG
committed to provide the technical assistance for this process, while the ICF financed the software
and infrastructure to set up the single window.
8. The single window for international trade (GUCE – Guiche Unico de Comercio Externo)
integrated nine government agencies involved in the import-export process. The WBG team
worked with each individual agency and mediated among them to educate them about the
proposed system and the value of the online platform. Each agency had different business
processes and information requirements about the goods traded. Before integration into the online
platform, the WBG team worked with the agencies to rationalize and standardize these processes.
9. Several milestones ensured the reform’s success:
a) Establishment of a risk-based inter-agency physical inspection procedure. Prior to the
reform, customs and other agencies were conducting physical inspections on nearly
80 percent of all consignments. Thanks to training from the WBG team, the agencies
now conduct joint inspections on just 18 percent of all cargo.
b) Remote access to information and document submission for customs brokers and
shipping agents. Parties are now able to conduct trade procedures online, eliminating
the need for paper documents, which were prone to mistakes and opportunities for
unofficial payments.
c) Single payment for all duties, fees and taxes. Previously, traders had to visit six
agencies to make seven payments for a single import transaction.
10. The easing of trade procedures has contributed to time and cost savings for both traders
and the public sector. The reforms implemented by the GoSTP are reflected in international
comparisons of the ease of doing business. STP moved closer to the regulatory frontier of best
practice in the trading across borders indicator—improving its score from 62.43 points in the
Doing Business 2015 report (data as of May 31, 2014) to 66.03 in DB2018. During that period
STP reduced the border compliance time from 163 to 150 hours for imports and from 115 to 83
hours for exports. These improvements in trade procedures build on previous advance in reducing
the costs to import and export, as illustrated in the reduction from US$937 to US$690 in the cost
to export, and from US$784 to US577 in the cost to import, between 2011 and 2014. (Doing
Business methodology for trading across borders changed in 2015, hence it is not possible to
compare the data between the old and new methodology).
59
<<<PDF_PAGE_60>>>
Annex 9: Evolution of Partnerships in São Tomé and Príncipe
1. WBG ensured close coordination with DPs on policy dialogue. Effective collaboration
and coordination between the World Bank, the IMF, the AfDB and the EC helps advance the
policy dialogue on macroeconomic, PFM, and structural reforms. The World Bank coordinates
closely with the IMF on the DPO series especially regarding fiscal and tax reforms. The World
Bank also fosters policy dialogue with partners such as Angola, the Netherlands, Israel, Brazil,
and Portugal, while undertaking regular dialogue with domestic stakeholders including the
relevant Commissions in Parliament, business organizations and civil society organizations. This
dialogue is helping narrow the information gap regarding World Bank activities, underlined in
client surveys. The GoSTP is assuming stronger leadership over donor coordination, beginning
with the preparation of the October 2015 London SteP-In Conference and has been maintained
since, although meetings are irregular.
2. WBG successfully leveraged financing from partners and collaborated on project
design to support key lending priorities. In the energy sector, the Power Sector Recovery
Project (P157096) has mobilized US$13 million from the EIB. In transport, a joint approach to
climate resilient road rehabilitation has been developed for the Transport Development and
Coastal Protection Project (P161842), with EIB and RVO (Dutch Bilateral cooperation) financing
a parallel project (US$30 million) to strengthen the resilience of and rehabilitate the seafront road
in the capital, São Tomé. In the financial sector, the World Bank is providing parallel technical
assistance through the ongoing FIRST Payments TA project for the AfDB investment operation
in payments systems infrastructure, while the recommendations of the Financial Sector Strategy
TA (P150418) are being implemented through activities financed by AfDB. The World Bank has
also worked closely with UNDP toward implementation of the Adaptation to Climate Change
Project (P111669), and with UNICEF through the design and piloting of the Parental Education
Program, as well as design of the Social Protection and Skills Development Project (P163088).
3. Also, WBG leveraged resources from partners and TFs to fund advisory work. The
GEF provided US$4.3 million for the FY11 Adaptation to Climate Change Project, which closed
in FY17, as well as US$1.15 million for the FY18 WACA Project. The GPE funded
US$1.1 million for the Education for All Project, and the TF for Statistical Capacity Building
funded the FY17 Household Budget Survey Recipient Executed TF Project. The CPS also made
strategic use of World Bank Executed TFs to guide client reforms and WBG engagement.19 The
World Bank has supported STP through a South-South Knowledge exchange TF, including
knowledge exchanges between STP and Mozambique and Cape Verde, which culminated in the
development of the STP Investment Promotion Strategy. The World Bank also mobilized Africa
Renewable Energy Access Program TF to finance a Strengthening Energy Sector Monitoring and
Planning Capacity ASA (P155621). Resources have been secured through the PPIAF TF to
support the establishment of a PPP framework in the energy sector (“TF0A7283 Private Sector
Participation Options to Foster RE and Achieve NDC Targets for STP” project, US$0.1 million).
19 The Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening Initiative (FIRST) funded activities to strengthen bank resolution
and payment systems; the Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) funded an ASA to strengthen
client capacity for planning and monitoring in the energy sector; the PPIAF TF funded an ASA on Private Sector
Participation Options to Foster Renewable Energy and the Rapid Social Response (RSR) program funded an ASA to
develop delivery systems for social protection programs, which informed the development of the FY19 Social
Protection and Skills Development Project.
60
<<<PDF_PAGE_61>>>
Annex 10: Map of São Tomé and Príncipe
61