<<<PDF_PAGE_1>>>
The World Bank Group Partnership
with the Philippines, 2009–18
Country Program Evaluation
The
World
Bank
Group
Partnership
with
the
Republic
of
the
Philippines
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
dezirohtuA
erusolcsiD
cilbuP
<<<PDF_PAGE_2>>>
© 2019 International Bank for This work is a product of the staff of The RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS
Reconstruction and Development / World Bank with external contributions. The material in this work is subject
The World Bank The findings, interpretations, and to copyright. Because The World
1818 H Street NW conclusions expressed in this work Bank encourages dissemination
Washington, DC 20433 do not necessarily reflect the views of of its knowledge, this work may be
Telephone: 202-473-1000 The World Bank, its Board of Executive reproduced, in whole or in part, for
Internet: www.worldbank.org Directors, or the governments they noncommercial purposes as long as full
represent. attribution to this work is given.
The World Bank does not guarantee Any queries on rights and licenses,
Attribution—Please cite the report as:
the accuracy of the data included in this including subsidiary rights, should be
World Bank. 2019. The World Bank
work. addressed to World Bank Publications,
Group Partnership with the Philippines,
The boundaries, colors, denominations, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street
2009–18. Independent Evaluation Group.
and other information shown on any NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax:
Washington, DC: World Bank.
map in this work do not imply any 202-522-2625; e-mail:
Cover Photo: Konstantin Atanesyan / judgment on the part of The World pubrights@worldbank.org.
World Bank Bank concerning the legal status of
any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.
<<<PDF_PAGE_3>>>
The World Bank Group Partnership
with the Philippines, 2009–18
Country Program Evaluation
October 9, 2019
Careful observation and
analysis of program data
and the many issues
impacting program
efficacy reveals what
works as well as what
could work better. The
knowledge gleaned is
valuable to all who strive
to ensure that World
Bank goals are met and
surpassed.
<<<PDF_PAGE_4>>>

<<<PDF_PAGE_5>>>
contents
Abbreviations v
Acknowledgments vii
Overview ix
Management Response xix
Report to the Board from the Committee
on Development Effectiveness
Subcommittee Report xxii
Background and Context 1
Country Context 1
World Bank Group Strategy 4
World Bank Group Operations 5
Partnerships 8
Evaluation Scope and Methods 10
Macroeconomic Management and Governance 12
World Bank Group Program Focus and Results 14
Conclusions 19
Private Sector–Led Growth 23
World Bank Group Program Focus and Results 24
Conclusions 28
Better Services for the Poor 32
World Bank Group Program Focus and Results 33
Conclusions 38
Strengthening Resilience to Natural Disasters, Climate Change, and Violent Conflicts 41
Disaster Risk Management 41
Climate Change and Environment 45
Peace and Reconciliation in Mindanao 49
Conclusions and Recommendations 58
References 62
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group iii
<<<PDF_PAGE_6>>>
Boxes
Box 1.1 | Gender in World Bank Group Programs 3
Box 3.1 | Land Tenure System in the Philippines 24
Box 5.1 | Timeline of Conflict in Muslim Mindanao 50
Box 5.2 | T he World Bank Group’s Engagement in Postconflict Reconstruction in Marawi 53
Box 5.3 | The Bangsamoro Conflict Monitoring System 54
Figures
Figure 1.1 | W orld Bank Lending Portfolio by Global Practice and Fiscal Year 6
Figure 1.2 | W orld Bank Advisory Services and Analytics 7
Figure 1.3 | IFC Investment (Net Commitment) by Engagement Area 9
Figure 3.1 | R anking of the Top Business Environment Obstacles for Firms
(Enterprise Surveys 2009 and 2015) 25
Figure 4.1 | Poverty Head Count Ratio at $1.90 and Gini Index
(percent of population) 34
Figure 5.1 | Emission and Energy Intensity of the Philippine Economy 47
Figure 5.2 | E lectricity Sources in the Philippines 48
Tables
Table 1.1 | P overty Rate in Selected East Asian Countries 2
Table 2.1 | Selected Governance Indicators, 2006–17 13
Table 2.2 | R esults in Macroeconomic Management and Governance 19
Table 3.1 | R esults in Private Sector–Led Growth 29
Table 4.1 | S elected Economic and Human Development Indicators 33
Table 4.2 | R esults in Better Services for the Poor 38
Table 5.1 | R esults in Disaster Risk Management 43
Table 5.2 | R esults in Climate Change and Environment 48
Table 5.3 | Selected Human Development Indicators of ARMM and the National Capital Region 51
Table 5.4 | R esults in Peace and Reconciliation in Mindanao 56
Appendixes
Appendix A. Country Program Evaluation Outcome Ratings 71
Appendix B. List of People Interviewed 76
Appendix C. World Bank Group Strategic Objectives and Country Program Evaluation Framework 86
Appendix D. Partnerships 90
Appendix E. Gender Coverage 93
Appendix F. Mindanao Conflict Background 96
Appendix G. Country Program Evaluation Methodology 99
Appendix H. Portfolio Review 101
iv The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Contents
<<<PDF_PAGE_7>>>
abbreviations
4Ps Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program
ARMM Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao
ASA Advisory Services and Analytics
BARMM Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
BDA Bangsamoro Development Agency
CAS Country Assistance Strategy
CAT DDO catastrophe deferred drawdown option
CCT conditional cash transfer
CDD community-driven development
CPAR Country Procurement Assessment Report
CPE Country Program Evaluation
CPS Country Partnership Strategy
CSO civil society organization
DPL development policy loan
FY fiscal year
GDP gross domestic product
GIFMIS government integrated financial management information system
IBRD International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
IEG Independent Evaluation Group
IFC International Finance Corporation
IMF International Monetary Fund
Kalahi-CIDSS Kapit-Bisig Laban sa Kahirapan-Comprehensive and Integrated Delivery of
Social Services
KC-NCDD Kalahi-CIDSS national community-driven development
LGU local government unit
MDG Millennium Development Goal
MIGA Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
MILF Moro Islamic Liberation Front
MRDP Mindanao Rural Development Project
MSME micro, small, and medium enterprises
MTF Mindanao Trust Fund
<<<PDF_PAGE_8>>>
PDP Philippine Development Plan
PFM public financial management
PLR Performance and Learning Review
PPP public-private partnership
PRDP Philippine Rural Development Project
SMEs small and medium enterprises
SOE state-owned enterprise
SWDRP Social Welfare and Development Reform Project
UMIC upper-middle-income country
All dollar amounts are U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated.
vi The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Contents
<<<PDF_PAGE_9>>>
acknowledgments
The report was prepared by an Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) team led by Konstantin
Atanesyan (senior evaluation officer) and was conducted under the guidance and supervision of Jeff
Chelsky (manager) and Oscar Calvo-Gonzalez (director) and under the overall direction of Alison
Evans (Director-General, Evaluation, and vice president).
The evaluation team included IEG staff and consultants: Corky De Asis, Lev Freinkman, Silke Heuser,
Takatoshi Kamezawa, Basil Kavalsky, Manuela Mot, George Polenakis, Cyrel San Gabriel, and Maria
Shkaratan. Elena Bardasi (senior economist), who led a concurrent project performance assessment
in the Philippines, joined the task team for the field mission and contributed to relevant parts of the
report. Patricia Acevedo, Yasmin Angeles, Carla Coles, and Moira Enerva provided administrative
support to the task team in Washington, DC, and Manila.
Peer reviewers for this evaluation included Emmanuel Jimenez (executive director, International
Initiative for Impact Evaluation, and former director, World Bank and IEG), Alan Gelb (senior fellow
and director for studies, Center for Global Development), Yuko Tanaka (director for evaluation at
Japan International Cooperation Agency and former Japan International Cooperation Agency
representative in the Philippines), and Alfredo Pascual (chief executive officer of the Institute of
Corporate Directors, former president of the University of the Philippines, and director at the Asian
Development Bank).
IEG is grateful to the numerous representatives of the government, private sector entities, and
nongovernmental organizations who provided valuable insights into the World Bank Group’s program
in the Philippines. The team is also thankful to the World Bank Group management and country
team members, including both previous and current staff working on the Philippines program, who
provided valuable time, information, and feedback to the evaluation team.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group vii
<<<PDF_PAGE_10>>>

<<<PDF_PAGE_11>>>
Key Messages
Overview
1 The Philippines experienced sustained high
rates of economic growth and improved
development outcomes in the past decade and
is on track to achieve upper-middle-income
country status in the next few years. These
achievements are even more impressive in the
context of recurring severe natural disasters
and conflict in Mindanao.
2 Nevertheless, the Philippines still struggles
with fundamental structural issues. These
include very high inequality, still-high levels of
poverty and vulnerability, a weak investment
climate and a private sector dominated by a
few large conglomerates, underperformance
of the agriculture and manufacturing sectors,
a large infrastructure gap, inadequate quality
of education and health services, and low
capacity at the local government level. The
capture of the political system by elites is both
a cause of many of these problems and a
constraint to addressing them.
3 Despite the many constraints, during the
past decade, the World Bank Group made
ix
<<<PDF_PAGE_12>>>
a substantial contribution to the improved economic performance of the
Philippines in the areas relevant to the country’s development priorities and
based on its comparative advantages. The impact of the Bank Group’s
contribution was significant in strengthening macroeconomic management,
governance, social protection, and disaster risk management; upgrading
rural infrastructure; and contributing to peace and reconciliation in
Mindanao. The Bank Group’s support was less successful in promoting
private sector development and financial inclusion, advancing the climate
change mitigation agenda, and enhancing the capacity of subnational
governments.
4 The generally positive outcomes of the Bank Group–supported program
over a sustained period represent a significant achievement. But there
is scope for the World Bank to have a greater impact. Therefore, this
evaluation makes the following recommendations: consider further updating
the well-established long-running programs; improve the balance and
focus of analytical work, thereby responding to the government’s requests
and including implementation support; consider making Mindanao a focal
area for support; and better coordinate and sequence World Bank and
International Finance Corporation interventions to more effectively address
weaknesses in private sector development.
x The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Overview
<<<PDF_PAGE_13>>>
Overall Assessment Summary
THIS COUNTRY PROGRAM EVALUATION (CPE) assesses the development
effectiveness of the World Bank Group program in the Philippines between 2009 and 2018. The
CPE provides input to the next Country Partnership Framework for the Philippines and may offer
lessons for Bank Group country programs in other lower-middle-income countries facing similar
development challenges.
The period under review (2009–18) saw strong economic performance in the Philippines. Growth
has been sustained at higher levels than in the previous decade and poverty has been reduced.
Strong global demand resulted in growing remittances and income from the booming services
sector. The Philippines is well on track to achieve upper-middle-income country (UMIC) status in
the near future. These achievements are even more impressive in the context of recurring severe
natural disasters and conflict in Mindanao. However, higher growth has not resolved many of the
fundamental structural problems that characterize the economy. The Philippines still has one of
the world’s highest rates of inequality, and productivity in agriculture and manufacturing lags most
regional comparators. Although there are some improvements in human development, serious
shortcomings remain in results on family planning, nutrition, maternal mortality, and education
quality. Infrastructure, particularly in transport and municipal services, is inadequate to meet the
needs of the rapidly growing and urbanizing population.
The Bank Group program was able to make a substantial contribution to the country’s improved
economic performance. In many respects, the Bank Group’s contribution to development outcomes
in the Philippines was driven by a set of large, well-established, and long-running interventions
that can be described as “development platforms.” Most of these were put in place before the
period under review and remain the core of the World Bank’s support. These platforms and the
accompanying analytical work reinforced one another and enhanced the World Bank’s effectiveness.
The dilemma for the World Bank is that these programs—though in line with the objectives of the
previous two administrations—may be less central to the priorities of the current government, which
puts emphasis on addressing the huge gap in national infrastructure. The World Bank is as not well
placed to support this objective as other development partners who often provide less costly funding
and have been traditionally more active in this area in the Philippines. Although the World Bank
has global expertise of relevance to the government in areas critical for addressing the country’s
most pressing developmental needs, it is currently underused in the Philippines. In many of these
areas, the Bank Group has a comparative advantage based on its global experience and technical
expertise and could do more. This comparative advantage includes disaster risk management
and climate change, peace and reconciliation in Mindanao, subnational governments’ capacity to
provide better services, nutrition and education quality, private sector development (particularly
small and medium enterprises; SMEs), and good governance. The World Bank may want to review
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group xi
<<<PDF_PAGE_14>>>
its approach to Advisory Services and Analytics (ASA) to balance the broad diagnostic work with
implementation support. There would also be a benefit in the form of closer coordination and joint
work with the authorities, and increased use of local expertise.
Overall, despite all constraints, there is broad alignment between the areas of the Bank Group’s
comparative advantage and the strategic goal of the government to achieve UMIC status by 2022.
Reaching UMIC status is feasible if the country continues to grow rapidly, but it is necessary to look
at more than just the growth numbers. The Philippines still faces major challenges, and the country
needs to improve governance and the business climate, improve human development indicators
(especially on nutrition, stunting, and quality of education), bridge the infrastructure gap (both for
private sector development and disaster risk management at both national and local levels), and
address outstanding environmental and climate change–related issues. The alignment of this agenda
with the Bank Group’s comparative advantage should provide the basis for agreement on the best
way the Bank Group can support the government’s objectives. The Bank Group’s support program
in the upcoming Country Partnership Framework can be presented in this context.
Country Context and World Bank Group Strategy
The Philippine economy has been growing over the past decade and moving rapidly toward the
lower-middle-income economy graduation threshold (gross national income per capita of $3,895
as of 2019). During 2008–17, annual gross domestic product growth averaged 5.6 percent, up from
4.1 percent in 1996–2005. Despite recently higher growth, and the aspiration to reach upper-middle-
income economy status by 2022, performance on poverty, inequality, and human development
has been persistently low. The national poverty rate was 21.6 percent in 2015, the Gini coefficient
hovered around 45 percent during the past decade, and the United Nations Human Development
Index ranks the Philippines 113th of 189 countries in the world. The Philippines is a natural disaster
hot spot challenged by frequent deadly typhoons, tropical storms, and earthquakes that cause
serious economic and social losses. It has also been affected by internal unrest, predominantly the
protracted conflict and violence on the island of Mindanao in the south of the country. Issues such
as the significant infrastructure gaps, persistent governance and business climate problems, and
unfinished decentralization also hold the country back.
The Bank Group’s engagement in the Philippines reflected the development agenda of the
government of the Philippines, as elaborated in two five-year Development Plans. During the Aquino
administration (2011–16), the emphasis was on good governance, anticorruption, and sector reforms
in health and education. Under President Duterte (since 2016), the focus moved to scaling up public
investment for infrastructure, job creation, and economic growth. Both plans also prioritized peace
and development in Mindanao, which is emphasized by the current administration. Both Bank Group
strategies included support for macroeconomic management, good governance, inclusive growth
and poverty reduction, private sector development, and building resilience (including support for
peace and reconciliation in Mindanao). The 2009–13 strategy was built around recovery from the
global financial crisis. It focused on macroeconomic stability, delivery of public services, improving
xii The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Overview
<<<PDF_PAGE_15>>>
the investment climate, and reducing vulnerability. The 2014–19 strategy gave inclusive growth
and poverty reduction a more central role. The strategy was revised and simplified substantially in
2017. These changes reflected the new administration’s policy priorities; however, in retrospect it
appears that some of the changes in the World Bank’s strategy, such as the significant scaling down
of governance work and removal of poverty measurement, were neither warranted nor explicitly
requested by the government.
World Bank Group Operations
The Bank Group program included International Bank for Reconstruction and Development lending
and International Finance Corporation (IFC) investments of approximately $8.2 billion, and a robust
multisectoral program of ASA. There was no Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
exposure during this period. The Bank Group’s program was anchored on four large flagship
programs: (i) development policy loans focusing on governance, investment climate, and addressing
vulnerabilities; (ii) regional and nationwide rural development projects; (iii) support to social welfare
through conditional cash transfers (CCTs); and (iv) nationwide community-driven development
projects. Lending was supported by a comprehensive program of advisory services. A large
proportion of IFC investments covered financial markets and climate change mitigation, while IFC
advisory services focused on climate financing, public-private partnerships, access to finance, and
policy related to doing business and to competition.
Results of the World Bank Group Program
The Bank Group made a substantial contribution to development outcomes and improved economic
performance. Its contribution was relevant because it was focused on sectors critical for addressing
the country’s most pressing developmental needs and was within the areas of its comparative
advantage. The Bank Group’s impact was significant in strengthening macroeconomic management,
governance, social protection, and disaster risk management, and also in contributing to peace and
reconciliation in Mindanao, upgrading rural infrastructure, and improving access to services for the
poor. Bank Group support was less successful in promoting private sector development (particularly
for SMEs) and financial inclusion; supporting climate change mitigation measures; and enhancing
the capacity of subnational governments. Overall, the CPE rates achievement of the Bank Group’s
program objectives moderately satisfactory.
Bank Group knowledge services have been of high quality and central to its comparative advantage
and program effectiveness in the Philippines. They were often based on global best practice, generated
evidence relevant for decision-making, and typically had an impact on stakeholder awareness.
Currently, however, there appears to be less interest in ASA in some areas because its earlier scale
may have exceeded both the appetite and absorptive capacity of counterparts. Many stakeholders
interviewed by the Independent Evaluation Group felt that the World Bank might have overemphasized
basic diagnostics and analytics and could have provided more support for implementation.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group xiii
<<<PDF_PAGE_16>>>
The World Bank played an important convening function in many areas. For example, it made a
major contribution to a gradual development of broad interagency consensus on important policies,
and its successful multisector operations linked several departments to meet their objectives. The
World Bank provided the necessary long-term commitment and oversight to maintain these links and
helped successive administrations keep them in place.
The Bank Group program in the Philippines did not take full advantage of potential World Bank–IFC
synergies. The declared “One Bank” approach, whereby the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development and IFC would draw on each other’s comparative advantages (while avoiding
conflicts of interest), did not materialize at an operational level to an effective extent for much of the
review period. MIGA did not have a program in the country, even in the areas where its presence
could have added value, such as in Mindanao.
Partnerships were a key component of the Bank Group’s work in the Philippines. The Bank Group
engaged with local, national, and international stakeholders on program development, funding, and
implementation. The most important partnerships included multilateral organizations (for example,
the Asian Development Bank on social protection and community-driven development, the European
Union on the peace process in Mindanao and energy, various United Nations agencies on Mindanao
and health, the International Monetary Fund on macroeconomic and fiscal reforms), bilateral partners
(for example, the Japan International Cooperation Agency on private investment and job creation or
the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade on multisector advisory and analytical work),
and many local civil society, academic, and private sector entities on education, governance, private
sector development, and other areas.
Results and Achievements by Engagement Area
The CPE reviewed the Bank Group program in four strategic engagement areas, derived from
two country strategy documents. The following briefly describes the main achievements in each
engagement area.
1. Macroeconomic Management and Governance
Despite an unfinished reform agenda, significant results were achieved in improving macroeconomic
management and governance, and the Bank Group played an important supporting role. These results
included progress in tax collection, better public procurement, and more efficient public spending.
However, many public financial management reforms remain incomplete, and the absence of a modern
integrated financial management information system represents a significant constraint to further
rationalization of public spending. In addition, more support is needed to strengthen public demand
for government accountability. The program was well aligned with the government’s development
priorities, although its relevance has somewhat declined since the 2017 Bank Group strategy review.
Sustainability of major program achievements appears to be high because they are backed by strong
government ownership. The quality of the Bank Group’s knowledge services was consistently high,
and much appreciated by the client, yet somewhat fragmented and at times too supply-driven. Lack
xiv The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Overview
<<<PDF_PAGE_17>>>
of progress on the decentralization agenda has been a critical development constraint. The Bank
Group was not able to develop effective partnerships at the subnational level, and its contribution to
strengthening local government capacity was insufficient. Overall rating: moderately satisfactory.
2. Private Sector–Led Growth
The private sector is the engine of growth in the Philippines, driven largely by the services
sector. The Bank Group program covered several areas related to private sector development,
including improving the investment climate and access to financial services, boosting agricultural
competitiveness and productivity, and introducing public-private partnerships. Overall, greater
progress was made on improving rural incomes and agricultural productivity than on the investment
climate, access to finance, and public-private partnerships in infrastructure. The rural development
project model that combined support for rural infrastructure with enterprise development proved
to be a successful approach for improving rural incomes and promoting regional development,
although there is room for improvement. Despite increased lending to SMEs from IFC client banks,
limited progress was made in improving access to formal financial services, especially for the poor.
The Bank Group’s strategic objectives in this area have been relevant to country needs, but its
operational response did not take full advantage of potential World Bank–IFC synergies, and results
were uneven across engagement areas. Moreover, the “One Bank” strategic approach did not
materialize operationally; World Bank–IFC cooperation was rare (particularly in the early years of the
review period) and did not produce tangible results that were visible at the time of the evaluation.
MIGA has not had exposure in the Philippines since 2000. Overall rating: moderately unsatisfactory.
3. Better Services for the Poor
After decades of persistently high poverty and lagging human development, the Philippines has
achieved much progress in the past decade. An improved fiscal situation has permitted the
allocation of resources to social protection and service provision, which has helped achieve key
Millennium Development Goals. The World Bank has made a substantial contribution to this area
in the Philippines. Main achievements include a contribution to poverty targeting and measurement
and the development of a successful CCT program, which has enhanced the education and
health outcomes of children from recipient households. The national community-driven and rural
development programs have made significant contributions to the quality of life for rural households
by making villages more accessible and providing other much-needed infrastructure. Support for
health and education was less successful. World Bank programs helped improve access to services,
but there are still problems that require greater attention: quality of education, family planning,
stunting, nutrition, and maternal mortality. With only limited lending for health and education, the
World Bank carried out a large program of analytic work. A particularly important contribution was
the work done to illustrate the potential for using revenues from additional “sin taxes” on alcohol
and tobacco to finance expanded support for the poor by the national health insurance provider.
Sustainability of achievements in these areas requires continued attention, particularly in light of
political cycles and associated policy changes. The achievements of the large social protection and
community-driven development programs may be limited if there is no effort to update and further
institutionalize them. Overall rating: moderately satisfactory.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group xv
<<<PDF_PAGE_18>>>
4. Strengthening Resilience
Disaster risk management. The Philippines is the third most disaster-prone country in the world
and is likely to experience even more frequent and intense climate-related disasters in the future,
disproportionately affecting the poor. Under pressure of rapid growth and urbanization, infrastructure—
particularly in poorer areas—has not been designed to the standards required to withstand natural
disasters. The government transformed its approach to disaster risk management from reactive to
proactive in response to the series of natural disasters that happened in 2009–13. The World Bank
provided timely and effective assistance through financing and a large number of advisory services,
making funds available in the immediate aftermath of a disaster through development policy loans with
catastrophe deferred drawdown option, and helping to develop disaster risk financing and insurance
strategies. At the sector level, the World Bank also helped achieve important breakthroughs, such as
development of a comprehensive Metro Manila flood management plan. Although the World Bank’s
program achieved increased resilience to natural disasters in most respects and its strategy was
broadly aligned with and relevant to the government’s goals, it may need an update. The Philippines
now has comprehensive state-of-the-art strategies and plans for disaster-relevant sectors at the
national level; the current binding constraint is at the local government level. More needs to be done to
address capacity at the local government level. The use of disaster preparedness information and risk
understanding is still weak, which continues to expose poor communities and infrastructure to high risk
of natural disasters. Overall rating: moderately satisfactory.
Climate change and environment. The Philippines’ vulnerability to natural disasters places it at the
forefront of international climate dialogue and explains the priority assigned to climate change by
recent administrations. The Philippines remains committed to mitigation action through the Paris
Agreement but is de facto pursuing actions that result in increased emissions, mainly because of
growing reliance on coal in the power sector and the lack of green action in the transport sector.
The Bank Group program in the mitigation area was highly relevant to the country’s developmental
priorities but too small and insufficiently catalytic to have a visible impact on negative trends. The Bank
Group’s adaptation and environmental improvement program was more effective. The Philippines
faces high levels of environmental degradation, and the World Bank sought to change behaviors
and increase awareness through small projects employing a bottom-up participatory approach
and through large rural development and infrastructure projects. Sustainability is likely because the
government prioritizes it at the strategy and investment levels. Participatory projects have earned
support from various stakeholders, including those at the local level, and are likely to be replicated by
the government. Although Bank Group–supported program outcomes were generally positive overall,
the scale of support was not sufficient to fundamentally change conditions. The level of environmental
degradation is overwhelming, and even the larger-scale interventions were too small relative to needs.
The government’s climate change strategy, policies, and related institutional arrangements still need
to be translated into action plans and implemented. Bottlenecks for both mitigation and adaptation
programs are inadequate cross-sectoral and vertical coordination, weak budget planning and
execution for managing climate programs, and low capacity for climate action at the local level. Overall
rating: moderately satisfactory.
xvi The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Overview
<<<PDF_PAGE_19>>>
Peace and reconciliation in Mindanao. The resolution of the protracted and multilayered violent
conflict in Mindanao is at an important turning point. After many years of negotiations, a peace
agreement was reached in 2014 between the government of the Philippines and the Moro
Islamic Liberation Front (MILF), culminating in a plebiscite in January 2019 that established the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM). The agreement paved the way for
the normalization process through programs tackling security, socioeconomic development, and
confidence-building. Continued Bank Group engagement in Mindanao made important contributions
to the peace and reconciliation processes and signaled that development was possible even
during active conflict and negotiation phases. The World Bank has been an effective manager of
consolidated international development assistance through the Mindanao Trust Fund and has kept
the fund functional even during times of high tension. The World Bank contributed to recovery in
conflict-affected communities, helped build confidence in the normalization process, and developed
and strengthened the capacity of the Bangsamoro Development Agency, the development arm
of the MILF and a key partner in delivering peace and development. Investments in small-scale
infrastructure enabled better access to basic services and developed entrepreneurship skills in
conflict-affected communities. The World Bank supported a comprehensive program of high-quality
analytic work, but the impact of this work on operations and government strategies remains to be
seen. Overall rating: satisfactory.
Recommendations
In the face of many constraints, the positive results of the World Bank–supported program over a
sustained period represent a significant achievement. But there is scope for the World Bank to have
greater impact. The following recommendations are suggested:
Consider revising and updating the large long-running programs: the development policy loan
series, the CCT program, rural development, and community-driven development projects.
These well-established and successful programs remain at the core of the World Bank’s support
for the Philippines. Although their continued relevance is not in question, some of the innovation
and experimentation that characterized their initial phases has been reduced and needs to be
revived. There are risks that some of these programs could lose relevance unless there is a
reassessment of how they relate to evolving realities and government priorities.
Apply successful models of subnational engagement, such as the rural development projects,
to expand presence and operations at the provincial and municipal levels and build the
capacity of subnational governments. There are many difficulties in operating at the local level
in the Philippines, and the World Bank is one of the few entities that has been able to get traction
in this area through social protection, community-driven, and rural development programs. The
World Bank should build on these successes and consider using some of the disaster hot spots
to pilot a new model of engagement at the subnational level.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group xvii
<<<PDF_PAGE_20>>>
Improve the overall balance of analytical and advisory engagement to make it more
demand-driven and selective, putting greater emphasis on collaborative approaches.
There is a clear appetite for analytical support for implementation, in addition to broad sector
diagnostics. In some sectors, the Bank Group could make a more systematic effort to use
local expertise (academia, think tanks) as partners in delivery of ASA, thereby enhancing local
analytical capacity.
Consider making Mindanao a focal geographic area of Bank Group support, and potentially
a model for in-depth regional engagement and local capacity building. Mindanao has the
largest concentration of poor in the Philippines (particularly the BARMM) and considerable
economic potential. This is an area of comparative advantage for the World Bank given the long
history of engagement, including experience with regional rural development projects, capacity
building at the Bangsamoro Development Agency, ongoing Marawi reconstruction, and high-
quality analytics.
Improve coordination and sequencing of World Bank and IFC interventions for private
sector development, operationalize the “One Bank” approach, and consider engaging
MIGA. World Bank–IFC cooperation should be complementary (while avoiding conflicts of
interest) and extend beyond the exchange of information to a more strategic alliance. MIGA
engagement could add value to promoting foreign investment in the country, especially in
Mindanao. The Bank Group could consider working with the Philippine authorities to develop
an explicit private sector development strategy, including advisory support to help deal with
elite capture and the impact of new technologies on growth, as well as mobilizing the country’s
large youth population more effectively.
xviii The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Overview
<<<PDF_PAGE_21>>>
Management Response
World Bank Group (WBG) Management welcomes this opportunity to respond to the report of the
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) on the Country Program Evaluation (CPE) for the Philippines.
The CPE evaluates the Bank Group’s contributions to the country’s development in priority areas of
engagement over the past decade and provides input to the next Country Partnership Framework for
the Philippines, also offering lessons for Bank Group country programs in other lower-middle-income
countries facing similar development challenges.
WBG Management appreciates the substantive nature of IEG’s assessment and the general
conclusion that WBG engagement in the Philippines over the last decade made a substantial
contribution to the country’s development priorities. The report recognizes that the WBG contribution
was significant in strengthening macroeconomic management, governance, mobilizing private
sector climate financing, expanding access to finance, social protection, disaster risk management,
upgrading rural infrastructure, and contributing to peace and reconciliation in Mindanao. We
further welcome the assessment that there is available scope for the WBG to have greater impact,
and the report points to areas where the WBG’s support could have leveraged more its expertise
and comparative advantage. This includes specific suggestions for promoting private sector
development, financial inclusion, advancing the climate change mitigation agenda, and enhancing
the capacity of subnational governments. These are valuable insights that can inform future WBG
partnership with the Philippines as well as other countries.
The CPE proposes that “the dilemma for the World Bank is that these programs—though in line
with the objectives of the previous two administrations, are less central to the priorities of the
current government…” specifying the current administration’s flagship priority agenda, large
infrastructure, where WBG does not play as large a financing role as other development partners.
It is management’s view, also reflected in the Philippine government’s response to the report, that
this observation by IEG is based on an incorrectly narrow portrayal of the Duterte administration’s
objectives. In its response letter, the National Economic Development Authority (NEDA) clarifies
that social protection is a priority of the administration and it deems long-running WBG-supported
programs like the CDD and the 4Ps (conditional cash transfer) program as “central to the objectives
of the current administration.” While the infrastructure program has garnered significant attention,
important and long-awaited reforms have also been achieved by this administration relating to human
capital, climate resilience, and competition/ competitiveness. For example, laws on Universal Health
Care, Social Protection, Disaster Resilience, and Doing Business have been passed, to name a few.
In pursuit of its development plan, the government has been coordinating financing and support
from all development partners, ensuring complementarity and avoiding overlaps to maximize the
impacts of development partner support. The Philippines has support from development partners
with considerable strength in infrastructure, and the World Bank’s comparative advantage has
been on macroeconomic management, social protection, health and education, rural development,
fragility and conflict, and poverty reduction. The long-running WB programs have exhibited significant
progress on a nationwide scale; the 4Ps has been institutionalized into law after spanning three
administrations, and the Philippines Rural Development Program (PRDP) across two administrations
with a secure footing for a longer period. These programs enable the country’s continued attention
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group xix
<<<PDF_PAGE_22>>>
on the goals of poverty alleviation and shared prosperity. This is of particular importance for middle-
income countries like the Philippines, which is working hard to maintain a high level of economic
growth but continues to struggle with inequality. As a long-term development partner, the continuation
of World Bank programs aligned with the long-term aspiration of client countries should be the
cornerstone of our engagement, continually expanding the program’s footprint and innovating to
improve efficiency while leveraging on global knowledge to accommodate emerging areas of interest.
We agree with IEG’s identification of disaster risk management and climate change; peace and
reconciliation in Mindanao; and subnational government capacity to provide better services as
emerging areas in which the WBG comparative advantage calls for more intense engagement. These
areas are currently included in the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period 2020-2023
that is being finalized. The work on disaster risk management as well as peace and reconciliation
in Mindanao has already been scaled up in FY19 and FY20 and will expand further. The IEG
recommendation to expand subnational engagement and build capacities of municipal and provincial
level governments presents a significant challenge, primarily caused by institutional constraints and
the absence of a clear legal mechanism on the government side for national government to extend
guarantees or on-lend WBG loans to subnational units. The provision of lending and guarantee
support to sub-national governments, mechanisms for the national government to on-lend or on-
grant at scale, would need to be championed within national agencies. The WBG has engaged on
this issue with government during the CPF period and for many years, though impact has indeed
been limited. The WBG continues to strongly advocate for this agenda. A recent Supreme Court
ruling that compels the national government to expand the national budget portion allocated to local
governments presents a new context in which to offer support toward designing a mechanism
for meaningful WBG engagement at the subnational level. The WB is actively pursuing this, and
government has welcomed the offer of advice on successful models of subnational engagement.
With regards to the role of Advisory Services and Analytics (ASA), and the need for more
demand-driven and selective ASA work in our programs in Middle-Income- Countries (MIC), it is
management’s view that while the majority of our ASA has been demand-driven, selected Bank-
identified diagnostics can add significant value (even in the absence a specific request from a
government agency) if they identify key issues for poverty reduction and shared prosperity that
inform the partnership and help to stimulate engagement around relevant innovations, global
knowledge, implementation know-how and lessons learnt. This complementarity has been a
success factor in all country programs, including for RAS-only client countries, and are also relevant
as traditional programs in MICs evolve into a hybrid programs in which RASs may play an increasing
role. The expanding RAS portfolio in the Philippines (in PFM, Procurement and Road Safety) is a
good illustration.
The CPE points to areas in which coordination among the Bank, IFC, and MIGA would have
promoted better results in the Philippines. World Bank–IFC cooperation can indeed be more
systematic, particularly in key strategic sectors such as agribusiness, climate resilience, and
sustainable tourism. In recent years, the WB and IFC country teams have become increasingly
integrated through several initiatives, including joint IFC-World Bank teams under FCI GP in climate
resilience and sustainable tourism, the CPSD/SCD and CPF drafting process, and close collaboration
in formulating IFC’s country strategy. The joint IBRD and IFC assessment of the competition
environment raised the dialogue on competition policies at the national level and has been integral
xx The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Overview
<<<PDF_PAGE_23>>>
to the preparation of the new DPL series, with both IFC and IBRD teams closely collaborating to
support the reform agenda. Similar close collaboration for many years on trade and transport
facilitation issues has benefited the Customs Modernization project under joint preparation. It is
management’s view that these substantial joint efforts show a clear and strategic deployment of the
“One Bank” approach in the country and warrant reconsideration of the report’s evaluation of the
IBRD and IFC collaboration.
IEG reviewed both IFC’s investment and advisory projects, among which a significant portion of
clients are Philippine government agencies. According to Appendix H Tables H.5 and H.7, IEG
rated all of IFC’s investment projects as moderately satisfactory or above, while 55% of advisory
projects were rated as moderately satisfactory or above. We note that these results are higher than
the current success rating in the recent IEG RAP 2018 report. We welcome the positive comments
on many aspects of the advisory work, especially the project level outcomes in Access to Finance,
climate finance and agribusiness. The report states that some advisory outcomes were not realized,
especially in the investment climate and PPP space, because of either a political administration
change or weak implementation capacity on the part of government. However, we would like to
emphasize the IEG comment on the catalytic role of the IFC on PPPs and draw attention to the
considerable learning that has been achieved through delivering projects whose outcomes are
still uncertain, or which in some cases led to transactions that did not close. We also note that
a number of projects that had not successfully closed at the time of evaluation have now been
completed successfully.
Finally, with regards to the subnational conflict in Mindanao, Management would like to reiterate
that a successful engagement calls for close collaboration with multilateral and bilateral partners
involved, as well as mobilizing the WBG knowledge and know-how resources from its engagement
in FCVs across regions and income groups. Our continued engagements over time have fostered
good relations and trust between the WBG and partners in the region, positioning the WBG
for strong engagement in the new BARMM. This is even more important as the Bangsamoro
Normalization Trust Fund (BNTF) and the post-conflict reconstruction of Marawi City are being
rolled out. Moreover, this sound track record in the Bangsamoro motivated the significant shift
to BARMM support at the PLR stage of the current CPS. The CPF under preparation is also
prioritizing WBG engagement in BARMM, with additional initiatives to bring in foreign investors
from Malaysia to potentially support Islamic finance and private sector development at large,
including through the possible support from MIGA. Strong collaboration with leading multinational
and bilateral partners will remain a WBG priority.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group xxi
<<<PDF_PAGE_24>>>
Report to the Board from the Committee
on Development Effectiveness
Subcommittee Report
The subcommittee of the Committee on Development Effectiveness met to discuss the Independent
Evaluation Group’s Country Program Evaluation entitled The World Bank Group Partnership with the
Philippines, 2009–18, and the draft World Bank Group management response.
The subcommittee welcomed the opportunity to discuss the report. Members appreciated the
Country Program Evaluation’s recognition of the Bank Group’s substantial contribution to the
Philippines’s improved economic performance, progress toward upper-middle-income country
status, as well as the Bank Group’s positive impact on the alleviation of poverty and promotion
of shared prosperity in the country. They also highlighted that the Bank Group’s continued
engagement in the conflict-affected areas of Mindanao had been a key contribution to the peace
and reconciliation processes. Members encouraged the Bank Group to continue developing
innovative approaches to support the macroeconomic management and governance reform agenda,
human capital development, social protection, community-driven and rural development programs,
resilience building for disasters, reducing inequality, and decentralization.
Management’s clarifications on the government’s current program being consistent with the Bank
Group’s development objectives and priority investment areas were well received by the committee.
Members acknowledged the Independent Evaluation Group’s commitment to revising the report’s
wording on the current administration’s alignment of key priorities with the long-running interventions
where the Bank Group had proved to be successful and have a comparative advantage.
xxii The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Overview
<<<PDF_PAGE_25>>>
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group xxiii
<<<PDF_PAGE_26>>>
1
<<<PDF_PAGE_27>>>
1
THIS COUNTRY PROGRAM EVALUATION (CPE)
assesses the effectiveness of the World Bank Group program in
the Philippines between 2009 and 2018 (fiscal year [FY]10–18).
It evaluates the Bank Group’s contributions to the country’s
Background
development in priority areas of engagement as defined in the
and Context
2009–13 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) and the 2014–19
Country Partnership Strategy (CPS). At the same time, it looks
into the extent to which the Bank Group took advantage of
potential synergies among the financial, knowledge, and
convening services that the Bank Group institutions offered, as
well as the factors that have limited or constrained the scale and
extent of the Bank Group’s engagement in the country.
The CPE provides input to the next Country Partnership
Framework for the Philippines and offers lessons for Bank
Group country programs in other lower-middle-income countries
facing similar development challenges.1 The last CPE (previously
called a Country Assistance Evaluation) for the Philippines
was completed in 1999. The selection of the Philippines for
this CPE was motivated in part by the country’s regional and
global economic importance as one of the larger, dynamic
economies in the East Asia and Pacific Region facing persistent
developmental challenges while striving to graduate from the
lower-middle-income economy status.
Country Context
The Philippines is located on a large archipelago in Southeast
Asia, approximately 800 kilometers away from the Asian
mainland, and has more than 7,100 islands, with a total area
of 300,000 square kilometers. The largest islands are Luzon
(105,000 square kilometers) and Mindanao (95,000 square
kilometers). It has a population of 104.9 million and a per
capita gross national income of $3,660 (2017).2 Despite
recently higher economic growth, and the aspiration to reach
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 1
<<<PDF_PAGE_28>>>
upper-middle-income economy status by 2022, the country’s performance on poverty, inequality,
and human development has been persistently low. The national poverty rate was 21.6 percent in
2015, the Gini coefficient hovered around 45 percent over the past decade, and the United Nations
Human Development Index ranks the Philippines 113th of 189 countries in the world (World Bank
2018b; UNDP 2018). A natural disaster hot spot challenged by frequent deadly typhoons, tropical
storms, and earthquakes that cause serious economic and social losses, the Philippines has also
been affected by internal unrest, predominantly the protracted conflict in the Mindanao region in the
south of the country. Efforts in recent years by the government of the Philippines, with the support of
the international community, have accelerated prospects for peace and sustainable development in
the region.
The Philippine economy was among the few in the region to avoid contracting after the 2008
global financial crisis. This was because of the country’s limited exposure to international capital
markets, its low dependence on exports and resilient domestic consumption, remittances from
millions of Filipinos working abroad, and a rapidly growing service industry. During 2008–17, annual
gross domestic product (GDP) growth averaged 5.6 percent, up from 4.1 percent in 1996–2005.
Macroeconomic and financial sector stability has improved since 2010 because the government
managed to control inflation and keep budget deficits largely within target ranges (IMF 2017, 2018).3
Unlike many high-performing East Asian countries, the Philippines has not developed a large
manufacturing base, with growth concentrated in service sectors. Agriculture, which employs most
poor people, has experienced minimal growth over the past decade, partly owing to climate change
and extreme weather conditions.
Despite generally good economic performance, poverty and inequality remain high, and the pace of
poverty reduction has been slow compared with other East Asian countries (table 1.1).4 The national
poverty rate fell to 21.6 percent in 2015 compared with 26.6 percent in 2006 (World Bank 2018c).
High concentration of wealth contributed to strong vested interests, hindering acceptance of
TABLE 1.1 | P overty Rate in Selected East Asian Countries
International Poverty Line Lower-Middle-Income-Class Poverty Line
($1.90 per day) ($3.20 per day)
Decline per Decli ne per
Country 2006 2015 year 2006 2015 year
Philippines 14.5 6.6 0.9 38.4 27.0 1.3
Thailand 0.7 0.0 0.1 6.2 1.1 0.7
China 18.8 1.9 2.4 43.5 20.2 3.3
Vietnam 19.5 2.8 2.1 51.3 11.6 5.0
Indonesia 27.5 7.5 2.2 65.6 34.0 3.5
Source: World Bank 2018c. Data for Thailand are for 2006 and 2013, for China 2005 and 2012, for Vietnam 2006 and 2014.
Note: The Philippines uses income as the welfare measure; other countries use consumption.
2 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 1
<<<PDF_PAGE_29>>>
reforms needed for more inclusive growth and faster poverty reduction. It is estimated that the top
1 percent of households own more than half the nation’s wealth, the fourth highest after the Russian
Federation; Turkey; and Hong Kong SAR, China (Credit Suisse Research Institute 2018). Differences
in the quality of human capital drive a large measure of the inequality in the Philippines. In addition,
repeated and increasingly frequent natural disasters undermine growth and poverty reduction.5
Persistent governance and business climate problems (including significant infrastructure gaps) also
hold the country back.6 Investment in infrastructure could not keep up with rapid urbanization and
population growth. According to the Global Competitiveness Index (2017–18), of 140 countries, the
Philippines ranks 92nd in overall infrastructure and 101st in transport infrastructure. Reforms in the
past decade brought some noticeable progress in strengthening governance, but this has stalled
recently. Other governance problems are related to an unfinished decentralization agenda, reflected
in a highly unequal distribution of public revenues, expenditures, and some key development
outcomes across regions. A poor business environment is another factor that limits firm growth and
competitiveness and exacerbates inequality; the Philippines is ranked 124th among 190 economies
on the ease of doing business, according to the World Bank’s latest Doing Business report (2019b).
The Philippines fares well globally on gender equality and has recorded gains in the political
participation of women, but challenges remain in attainment of key Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) affecting women and their participation in the labor market (box 1.1). The Philippines is
perceived as a relatively successful model of gender equality and is strong on gender equity in
education. The 2018 World Economic Forum Global Gender Gap Report ranked the Philippines
8th of 149 countries and tied for first on educational attainment. The country ranks well on
economic opportunity and political empowerment, but lower on health, with relatively high
maternal mortality. Although employment and unemployment rates for men and women are
roughly the same, only about half of women participate in the labor force compared with almost
80 percent of men (WEF 2018).
BOX 1.1 | Gender in World Bank Group Programs
Since 2009, the World Bank has conducted an annual assessment of gender
mainstreaming in the Philippines portfolio. In 2013, the World Bank prepared a country
gender assessment (in partnership with the Philippine Commission on Women and the
National Economic Development Authority), as input to the 2014 Country Partnership
Strategy. The strategy committed to continue ensuring that gender considerations were
mainstreamed into operations, consistent with both its own and government policies.
The Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program conditional cash transfer program pays cash
grants for education and health to women. Both Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program
and Kalahi (Comprehensive and Integrated Delivery of Social Services) programs have
Continued
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 3
<<<PDF_PAGE_30>>>
BOX 1.1 | Gender in World Bank Group Programs (continued)
focused on empowering women by getting them to organize family development service
sessions and serving as contact points and community leaders in the barangays. In
the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, the participatory approach has enabled
women, who are often marginalized from decision-making processes, to get involved
in community-driven development subprojects. Gender aspects are also important in
disaster risk management because natural disasters tend to disproportionately affect
women and children. The provision of water supply and sewerage services in Metro
Manila and interventions around Laguna de Bay had a positive impact on women’s
lives. Other World Bank interventions, such as the Participatory Irrigation Development
project, helped increase women’s presence in Irrigation Associations from zero to
20 percent and trained indigenous women in alternative livelihood activities. In 2014–16,
the International Finance Corporation supported the development of the Small and
Medium Enterprises Lending Program for Women in the Philippines with the Rizal
Commercial Banking Corporation. The program allowed the corporation to disburse
more than 2,000 loans to women-owned small and medium enterprises amounting to
more than $120 million.
World Bank Group Strategy
The country’s development agenda was reflected in six-year Philippine Development Plans (PDPs)
aimed at reducing poverty and improving the lives of the poorest segments of the population, but
the focus has shifted with changes in government. The strategic themes of the PDP 2011–16, under
the administration of President Aquino, were inclusive growth, good governance, anticorruption, and
relocation of resources for reforms in health, education, and social protection. The administration
of President Duterte, elected in 2016, aims to increase public investment for poverty reduction,
job creation, and economic growth. This is reflected in the PDP 2017–22, which seeks to lift
approximately 6 million Filipinos from poverty and achieve upper-middle-income country (UMIC)
status by 2022. The PDP also highlights a prominent priority of the government: delivering a
comprehensive agenda for peace and development in conflict-affected areas.
Both the 2009–13 CAS and 2014–19 CPS included support for macroeconomic management,
good governance, inclusive growth and poverty reduction, private sector development, and building
up resilience (appendix C, table C.1). The 2009–13 CAS was built around recovery from the global
financial crisis. It focused on macroeconomic stability, public delivery of services, improving the
investment climate, and reducing vulnerability (including through a conditional cash transfer [CCT]
program and improved stability and peace in Mindanao). The 2014–19 CPS gave inclusive growth
and poverty reduction a more central role. Its results framework was simplified substantially in
4 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 1
<<<PDF_PAGE_31>>>
2017 (for example, the number of results indicators dropped from 143 to 41) as policy priorities
changed with the new administration, including a significantly downsized program for governance.
The Performance and Learning Review (PLR) 2017 identified lack of progress on governance
reform and lack of relevance to the ongoing World Bank program as primary reasons for these
modifications. However, in retrospect, some of the changes in the World Bank strategy document,
such as the significant scaling down of the governance agenda and removal of an improved poverty
measurement objective, were neither warranted nor specifically requested by the government.
A key feature of the Bank Group’s strategy in the Philippines was continued support for peace and
stability in the conflict-affected areas of Mindanao. The 2014 CPS committed to implementing the
“peace dividend” after progress in the peace process and emphasized building trust to address low
social cohesion and high levels of violence in parts of Mindanao. The World Bank used “conflict-
sensitive” programming and implementation to help targeted communities access social and
economic infrastructure and services, as well as to improve livelihoods, mainly through a community-
driven development (CDD) approach. The 2017 PLR, in line with the priorities of the PDP 2017–22,
proposed a Comprehensive Program for Regional Development in Mindanao, with three core
components: (i) raising agricultural productivity, connectivity, and logistics from farm to market;
(ii) boosting human development; and (iii) addressing drivers of conflict.
World Bank Group Operations
The Bank Group program during the review period included International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development (IBRD) lending and International Finance Corporation (IFC) investments of
approximately $8.2 billion, and a multisectoral program of IBRD Advisory Services and Analytics
(ASA) and IFC advisory services. There was no Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
exposure during this period. The World Bank–supported program included 32 projects, with a total
commitment of $7 billion, including 26 investment project financing operations and six development
policy loans (DPLs). The largest share of projects, weighted by commitment size, was under the
Social, Urban, Rural, and Resilience Global Practice (27 percent), followed by Social Protection
and Labor (20 percent); Macroeconomics, Trade, and Investment (19 percent); and Agriculture
(11 percent). The World Bank delivered 201 ASA activities at a total cost of $72.7 million (financed
mainly through trust funds) (figure 1.1). IFC had 31 investment projects, with a total net investment
commitment of $1.2 billion. IFC provided 34 advisory services engagements, at a total cost of
$61 million (see appendix H for a detailed portfolio review).
The World Bank’s lending to the Philippines included four large flagship programs that provided
continuity of engagement in priority areas. The DPL series (DPLs 1–3, 2011–15) focused on
governance reform, improving the investment climate, and addressing vulnerabilities to natural
disasters. Rural development projects supported rural infrastructure and rural enterprise
development. The nationwide Social Welfare and Development Reform Projects (SWDRP)
supported the national Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program (4Ps) CCT program, as well as poverty
measurement and socioeconomic data collection (through associated ASA). The Kapit-Bisig Laban
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 5
<<<PDF_PAGE_32>>>
FIGURE 1.1 | World Bank Lending Portfolio by Global Practice and Fiscal Year
a. By Global Practice
2,000
1,800
1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
URS SPL MTI AGR WAT EDU TDD HNP ENV EAE GOV
Commitment Projects
b. Approvals by fiscal year and Global Practice
Source: World Bank.
Note: AGR = Agriculture; EAE = Energy and Extractives; EDU = Education; ENV = Environment and Natural Resources; GOV =
Governance; HNP = Health, Nutrition, and Population; MTI = Macroeconomics, Trade, and Investment; SPL = Social Protection and
Labor; TDD = Transport and Digital Development; URS = Social, Urban, Rural, and Resilience; WAT = Water.
6 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 1
)snoillim
,$(
tnemtimmoC
).on(
stcejorP
9
1,859
8
7
1,405
1,350
6
5
4
751
594 3
500
343 2
115 1
57 33 27
0
1,200
1,000
800
600
400
200
0
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
SPL MTI WAT URS EDU TDD AGR
)snoillim
,$(
tnemtimmoC
<<<PDF_PAGE_33>>>
FIGURE 1.2 | World Bank Advisory Services and Analytics
a. By Global Practice
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
URS GOV WAT TDD SPL MTI ENV EDU HNP FCI EAE AGR POV – CLC
Cost
b. By fiscal year
Source: World Bank.
Note: AGR = Agriculture; CLC = Climate Change; EAE = Energy and Extractives; EDU = Education; ENV = Environment and Natural
Resources; FCI = Finance, Competitiveness, and Innovation; GOV = Governance; HNP = Health, Nutrition, and Population; MTI =
Macroeconomics, Trade, and Investment; —. = not available; POV = Poverty; SPL = Social Protection and Labor; TDD = Transport and
Digital Development; URS = Social, Urban, Rural, and Resilience; WAT = Water.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 7
)snoillim
,$(
tsoC
)snoillim
,$(
tsoc
latoT
).on(
stcejorP
50
46
45
40
35
30
23 25
18 20
16 16
13 12 13 15
11
10
9
7 10
4
2 1 5
0
Projects
30
25.5
25
20
15
11.5 11.3
10
6.7
4.5 5.0
5 2.5 2.6 3.2
0
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
<<<PDF_PAGE_34>>>
sa Kahirapan-Comprehensive and Integrated Delivery of Social Services (Kalahi-CIDSS) national
CDD projects (KC-NCDD) provided financing for communal and municipal infrastructure through
community empowerment and mainstreaming CDD principles into local development planning and
service delivery.
The review period marked an evolution in World Bank assistance for disaster risk management
from knowledge sharing to lending and analytical work. The first World Bank operation in support
of disaster risk management was a DPL with a catastrophe deferred drawdown option (CAT
DDO) of $500 million (2011). The operation supported objectives in three areas: (i) strengthening
institutional capacity for disaster risk management, (ii) mainstreaming disaster risk management into
development planning, and (iii) better managing fiscal exposure to natural hazard impacts. World
Bank lending for disaster risk management significantly increased during the review period from
$250 million in FY10 to $1.8 billion by the end of FY18.7
The World Bank’s ASA program in the Philippines was generously supported by donor trust funds
(figure 1.2 and appendix H). These programs combined major analytic studies and policy notes,
technical assistance, training programs, conferences, and study tours. Three Global Practices
(Social, Urban, Rural, and Resilience; Macroeconomics, Trade, and Investment; and Governance)
were responsible for the delivery of close to half the nonlending products. In 2017, the World Bank
signed the first reimbursable advisory services agreement with the government of the Philippines,
covering several public financial management (PFM) issues.
IFC had a total net investment of $1.2 billion during the review period (figure 1.3). IFC supported
systemically important banks after the global financial crisis and helped attract investments to cities
struck by typhoon Haiyan. As a transaction adviser for public-private partnership (PPP) projects
during 2011–16, IFC helped relevant infrastructure agencies implement ongoing operations and
develop a pipeline of PPP activities. A significant share of IFC advisory services focused on climate
financing, access to finance, small and medium enterprise (SME) development, disaster risk
management, and improving the business climate and competition policy.
Partnerships
Partnerships were a key component of the Bank Group’s work in the Philippines. The Bank Group
engaged with local, national, and international stakeholders on program development, funding,
implementation, and delivery. As co-chair of the Philippines Development Forum alongside the
government, the Bank Group facilitated dialogue among government stakeholders and development
partners on the country’s policy reform agenda. The World Bank was the convener of a few working
groups under the Philippines Development Forum, such as on growth and investment climate, and
on peace and reconciliation in Mindanao. However, according to some within the government,
working group meetings were less productive in recent years. The World Bank coordinated closely
with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on macroeconomic policy recommendations and
technical assistance, especially on tax policy, and worked jointly with the Asian Development Bank
8 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 1
<<<PDF_PAGE_35>>>
FIGURE 1.3 | IFC Investment (Net Commitment) by Engagement Area
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Mitigation Energy Banking/Finance
Private
Enterprise
Adaptation
and
Env.
Water
and
San.
Util. FCV/Mindanao
Source: International Finance Corporation.
Note: Env. = environment; FCV = Fragility, Conflict, and Violence; IFC = International Finance Corporation; San. Util = Sanitation
Utilities.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 9
)snoillim
,$(
,tnemtimmoc
teN
).on(
stcejorP
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Net commitment Projects
and the Japan International Cooperation Agency to harmonize national procurement rules. The
Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade provided critical funding for a large number of
World Bank analytical reports in several important areas. The Asian Development Bank provided
parallel funding to important government programs supported by the World Bank (4Ps and Kalahi-
CIDSS).8 This cooperation provided important advocacy when the new administration started
having reservations about the program. The Bank Group and the Asian Development Bank also
worked together on the 2016 Philippines Development Forum to discuss new policy directions of the
government at an early stage. The European Union is a key partner in several areas, including energy
and fragility, conflict, and violence. An important partner in project implementation was the United
Nations through its various agencies. One of the most visible partnerships was with the United
Nations Development Programme, with which the World Bank created and jointly administered
the Facility for Advisory Support for Transition Capacities, a major source of technical and financial
assistance in the conflict-affected areas of Mindanao.
The Bank Group and development partners were actively involved in reconstruction and
reconciliation efforts in conflict-affected areas of Mindanao island. These activities were supported
by World Bank lending of $118 million in support of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao
(ARMM) Social Fund Project and the Mindanao Rural Development Project (MRDP). The World Bank
<<<PDF_PAGE_36>>>
also administered the multidonor trust fund for reconstruction and development in the amount of
$28.8 million. The trust fund financed projects to empower communities to recover from conflict and
promoted participatory governance. Currently, the World Bank is providing assistance for recovery,
rehabilitation, and reconstruction efforts in the city of Marawi, affected by a violent outbreak in 2017
(see appendix F for details on Mindanao conflict).
The Bank Group maintained strong dialogue with civil society organizations (CSOs) that provided
valuable perspectives on country development issues and the Bank Group’s partnership with
the government. The World Bank partnered with the Knowledge for Development Community,
consisting of higher learning institutions, foundations, and policy and research entities, to promote
constructive dialogue with local governments, business groups, the media, and others. CSOs were
important partners for activities related to governance and fragility, conflict, and violence. The World
Bank supported International Alert in establishing the Bangsamoro Conflict Monitoring System,9
a subnational violence tracking database used by stakeholders engaged in the Mindanao peace
process. At the same time, the World Bank built strong partnerships with the CSO community under
the Open Government Platform and other programs seeking to build demand for improvements
in governance. IFC established successful partnerships with local private sector entities to provide
holistic solutions to smallholder farmers to foster sustainable businesses. One example is the long-
term partnership with the Center for Agriculture and Rural Development, Rizal Microbank, and Bayer to
provide inputs, crop protection, and insurance tailored to the specific needs of local smallholder farms.
Evaluation Scope and Methods
The scope of this CPE was determined by the key engagement areas identified in the last two Bank
Group strategies for the Philippines. Although the 2009 and 2014 strategies covered similar areas,
they visibly varied in their thematic foci and ambition, particularly after the 2017 PLR. This CPE
used a combined assessment framework covering main areas included in both country strategies
(appendix D). The program outcome ratings and subratings assess the extent to which the World
Bank program achieved the results summarized in the combined assessment framework. They do
not attempt to assess the extent to which the partners were satisfied with the Bank Group program,
nor are they synonymous with Bank Group performance.
The CPE analysis was based on a set of overarching evaluation questions: (i) to what extent were
the Bank Group’s strategic positioning and scope of engagement relevant for, and aligned with, the
country’s main development constraints and development ambition; (ii) how, and to what extent,
did the Bank Group’s strategic engagement and program in the Philippines contribute to achieving
development results in an effective and efficient manner; and (iii) to what extent did the Bank Group
coordinate internally, and collaborate externally, with other development partners (taking into account
respective comparative advantage and government preferences)?
The evaluation applied the standard Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) CPE methodology, using
a combination of quantitative and qualitative data, document reviews, and stakeholder interviews,
10 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 1
<<<PDF_PAGE_37>>>
drawing on a range of sources to triangulate results and test robustness of findings (appendix G).
It analyzed the extent to which development results in the field could be attributed to the Bank
Group program and how the program contributed to achieving these results. In the Philippines,
political factors played a particularly important role in the formulation of government and Bank Group
programs, reflected in the fundamental policy shifts after each electoral cycle, and compounded by
the presence of ongoing internal conflict. Natural disasters and their profound effect on the economy
and the government’s priorities were another major factor considered.
1 Lower-middle-income economies are those with a gross national income per capita ranging between $1,006 and
$3,955; upper-middle-income economies are those with a gross national income per capita between $3,956 and
$12,235, according to the Atlas Classification used by the World Bank (2018). http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/
mic/overview.
2 The country is only at 35 percent of the East Asia and Pacific region’s average gross national income per capita
($10,170) and half (53 percent) of the East Asia and Pacific group excluding the high-income economies ($6,987).
3 The International Monetary Fund stated that the economic performance of the Philippines continued to be very strong
and that the medium-term macroeconomic outlook remained favorable. All three major credit agencies upgraded the
country’s sovereign credit ratings to investment grade in 2013, with a further upgrade to one notch above investment
grade by both Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s in 2014. A similar upgrade by Fitch took place in December 2017. In
April 2019, the Philippines got its highest credit rating to date from Standard & Poor’s Global Ratings, now at BBB+.
4 Between 2006 and 2012, the Philippines poverty rate, as measured by the international poverty line ($1.90/day),
declined only 0.9 percentage points per year compared with between 2.0 percent and 2.5 percent in China, Indonesia,
and Vietnam, and the lower-middle-income class poverty line ($3.20/day). It declined only 1.3 percentage points per
year compared with 3 to 5 percentage points for the same three countries (World Bank 2018c).
5 The Philippines is the world’s third most vulnerable country to natural hazards and 14th most affected by adverse
impacts of climate change. Since 1990, natural disasters have caused an estimated $23 billion in losses and damages
in the Philippines. On average, more than a million Filipinos are impoverished each year by natural disasters. Typhoon
Haiyan (2013) is estimated to have cost the country approximately 5 percent of gross domestic product. (World Bank
2018b; Philippines 2011, 206; United Nations University-Institute for Environment and Human Security, https://ehs.unu.
edu; German Watch 2013).
6 The Philippines’ high population growth—1.6 percent per year—is more than double the average for the East Asia
Region (0.7 percent), and nearly 50 percent higher than the world average (1.2 percent; World Bank 2018b).
7 The World Bank used a mix of lending instruments, including development policy financing and investment project
financing (catastrophe deferred drawdown options 1 and 2) and two supplemental development policy loans after the
aftermath of typhoons that hit the country during the Country Program Evaluation period. The second catastrophe
deferred drawdown option is still active, and its closing date has been extended to 2021.
8 Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program (Bridging Program for the Filipino Family, also known as 4Ps), is a conditional
cash transfer program of the government of the Philippines. Kalahi-CIDSS stands for Kapit-Bisig Laban sa Kahirapan
(Linking Arms against Poverty) Comprehensive and Integrated Delivery of Social Services—a nationwide community-
driven development program. It is built on the government’s program that started in 2002, and channeled funding for
infrastructure through municipal mayors.
9 International Alert is an international nongovernmental organization, established in 1986, working on peace and human
rights globally.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 11
<<<PDF_PAGE_38>>>
2
GOVERNANCE PROBLEMS AND MACROECONOMIC
risks have been among central constraints to inclusive and
sustainable growth in the Philippines since the 1990s. The
primary concern was the low level and weak effectiveness of
Macroeconomic
public spending on essential services, especially infrastructure
Management and
and the social sectors. The effects of weak tax collection
Governance
and a lack of transparency (and perceived high corruption) in
public spending, with the Philippines caught in a low-revenue,
low-expenditure trap since the late 1990s, have left revenues
insufficient to close the development gap with East Asian
comparator countries (see World Bank 2011h, 11). In addition,
elite capture, vested interests, and the lack of a consensus
among elites have been major constraints to governance reform.
The administration of President Aquino (2010–16) prioritized
anticorruption and governance improvements. The 2011–16
PDP called for a stable macroeconomic environment, increased
infrastructure investment, and improved governance. PDP
implementation during the first half of President Aquino’s
tenure was accompanied by increased attention to cross-
cutting governance issues. PFM reform focused on budget
transparency, better risk management, and better management
of state-owned enterprises (SOEs). The government of the
Philippines emphasized the expansion of public expenditure
by reallocating savings toward pro-poor programs, including
CCTs. The government also launched several cross-cutting
transparency initiatives, such as the Open Data Program.
However, progress has been uneven, and momentum stalled
after 2014. This reflected the decline in commitment toward
the end of the previous administration’s tenure and the shift in
priorities under the current administration, as reflected in various
governance indicators after 2014 (table 2.1). The slackening
of progress could be linked to the effects of a magnitude 7.2
12 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 2
<<<PDF_PAGE_39>>>
earthquake in 2013 and the devastating typhoon Haiyan. Recovery needs were massive and might
have diverted attention from reforms.
TABLE 2.1 | Selected Governance Indicators, 2006–17
Governance Indicator
(Source) 2006 2010 2014 2016 2017
Corruption Perceptions n.a.a 24 38 35 34
Index (Transparency Int’l)
Open Budget Index score 51 55 64 — 67
(Int’l Budget Partnership)
Control of Corruption (WGI) −0.8 −0.8 −0.4 −0.5 −0.5
Government Effectiveness −0.1 0.0 −0.2 0.0 −0.1
(WGI)
Regulatory Quality (WGI) −0.2 −0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0
Rule of Law (WGI) −0.4 −0.6 −0.3 −0.4 −0.4
Voice and Accountability −0.1 0.0 −0.2 −0.2 −0.1
(WGI)
Political Stability and −1.6 −1.7 −0.7 −1.4 −1.2
Absence of Violence (WGI)
Sources: The World Governance Indicators, Transparency International, the International Budget Partnership. http://info.worldbank.org/
governance/wgi/index.aspx#reports; https://www.transparency.org/news/feature/corruption_perceptions_index_2017; https://www.
internationalbudget.org/open-budget-survey/open-budget-index-rankings.
Note: Corruption Perceptions Index score relates to the degree to which corruption is perceived to exist among public officials and
politicians by business people and country analysts. Scores range between 0 (highly corrupt) and 100 (highly clean). Open Budget Index
score is a measure of budget transparency. It uses individual indicators that assess whether the central country government makes key
budget documents available to the public in a timely manner and whether the data contained in these documents are comprehensive and
useful. Scores range between 0 (highly nontransparent) and 100 (highly transparent). World Governance Indicators relate to the strength
of governance performance along six dimensions. These aggregate indicators combine the views of a large number of enterprises
and citizen and expert survey respondents in more than 200 countries. Scores range from –2.5 (weak performance) to 2.5 (strong
performance).
— = not available; n.a. = not applicable; WGI = World Governance Indicators.
a. The 2006 Corruption Perceptions Index for the Philippines (2.5) was calculated using a different methodology; therefore, it is not
compatible with later indexes.
The PDP (2017–22) under President Duterte maintained focus on inclusive growth but gave less
attention to governance. Instead, it pushed for increases in spending on infrastructure. The Duterte
administration advanced two significant economic management reforms: (i) a comprehensive tax
reform expected to yield additional revenue of 2 percent of GDP in the medium term (the first part of
which was approved by Congress in 2018) and (ii) a budget reform bill to strengthen transparency
and accountability in the budget system, establishing stronger links across the budget cycle to
secure the irreversibility of earlier PFM reforms.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 13
<<<PDF_PAGE_40>>>
World Bank Group Program Focus and Results
The Bank Group’s program covered four areas: (i) macroeconomic management and revenue
mobilization, (ii) expenditure rationalization, (iii) transparency and accountability in the public sector,
and (iv) decentralization and local government strengthening.
Macroeconomic Management and Revenue Mobilization
Both the 2009–13 CAS and the 2014–19 CPS initially emphasized support to the government of
the Philippines in macroeconomic and revenue management. To accommodate some of the new
or reinforced priorities of the Aquino administration, the 2011 CAS Progress Report suggested
additional strengthening in this area. The 2014 CPS also reflected continued broad and ambitious
governance-related reforms. However, the 2017 PLR significantly downsized the governance
program, narrowing policy priorities to increased public revenue mobilization and improved quality
and transparency of public financial reporting. Debt and risk management and SOE reform were
effectively removed from program priorities. The reasons given in the PLR included lack of reform
progress and low relevance to the ongoing Bank Group program. In retrospect, this downsizing may
not have been fully justified.
The Bank Group program consisted of a series of DPLs and a comprehensive program of analytical
work and technical assistance. Three DPLs (approved in 2011, 2013, and 2015) supported reforms
in tax policy and administration, risk management, and fiscal transparency. Planned DPLs 4 and
5 did not materialize because the government’s determination to push through difficult legislative
reforms waned.1 The analytical foundations of DPL-supported reforms were laid out in 2010 in a set
of Discussion Notes on topics of importance to the incoming Aquino administration. The Philippines
Development Report (2011) provided an in-depth analysis of the barriers to inclusive growth. Support
for tax reforms included ASA and assistance with implementation and in communicating tax reform
objectives to the public. Earlier work on tax policy was used to re-engage with the government after
the 2016 election. Macroeconomic and tax policy recommendations and technical assistance were
closely coordinated with the IMF.2
During the review period, the government achieved significant budget adjustments and reductions in
the deficit and external debt. The overall nonfinancial public sector net debt declined from 53 percent
of GDP in 2012 to approximately 43 percent in 2017, below the DPL program target for 2013. These
results raised market confidence: all three major credit agencies lifted the country’s sovereign credit
ratings to investment grade in 2013 with a further upgrade in 2014, thereby decreasing borrowing
costs for both the public and private sectors. In the 2017 IMF Article IV Consultation Report, the IMF
stated that the macroeconomic performance of the Philippines continued to be very strong and that
the medium-term macroeconomic outlook remained favorable. In 2011, the government undertook
a comprehensive reform of SOEs (also known as government-owned and controlled corporations),
which improved their performance significantly.
The improved macroeconomic situation reflects significant progress on the revenue side. Although
strengthening tax administration proved more challenging because of resistance from vested
interests, revenue gains allowed the government to raise funding levels in health, education, and
14 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 2
<<<PDF_PAGE_41>>>
social protection, with an emphasis on pro-poor programs.3 Other progress included improved
collection of excises from alcohol and tobacco, adoption of the Bureau of Customs Modernization
and Tariff Act, and preparation of a new tax reform package to raise a further 2 percent of GDP in
annual government revenues.
The World Bank made significant efforts to make the tax system more equitable. Several major
ASA argued for policy changes to improve tax equity by indexing petroleum excise taxes (frozen
since 1996) to boost revenues and improve the overall progressivity of the tax system, reducing tax
incentives for domestic firms, increasing real property taxation, and improving tax administration to
boost tax collection from the self-employed and professionals. However, those measures have not
been implemented as of May 2019.
The Bank Group’s contribution to improved revenue management has been significant. Major
reforms supported by DPLs included passage of the Government-Owned and Controlled
Corporations Governance Act to strengthen fiscal discipline and reduce contingent liabilities
for such corporations. Many reforms in macroeconomic management benefited from World
Bank technical assistance. DPLs also supported critical tax policy reforms: implementation
of a tobacco and alcohol excise tax (“sin tax”) reform and finalization of an annual online
Tax Expenditure Statement on fiscal investment incentives. The Bank Group’s support for
implementation of the “sin tax” law is seen by the client as a major success. The Bank Group
team helped reframe the debate on higher excise rates as primarily a public health issue, which
shifted the discussion and ultimately neutralized opposition.
Expenditure Rationalization
The main objectives of the Bank Group–supported program in this area were to raise spending
efficiency, improve pro-poor targeting, and enhance the quality of spending. These objectives were
pursued mostly through self-standing ASA, DPLs, and sector investment projects and dialogue,
often in coordination with development partners.4 Several public expenditure reviews drew
attention to gaps in public spending and informed DPL-supported reforms that facilitated budget
reallocations.5 In addition, the Bank Group undertook sector-level political economy assessments to
understand better the constraints to expenditure rationalization. This was supplemented by technical
assistance on budget planning. The Bank Group’s assistance for expenditure rationalization was
linked to government procurement reforms at national and local levels.6 The recent reimbursable
advisory services agreement provides support to modernize the e-procurement system (Philippine
Government Electronic Procurement System).
Budget planning in the Philippines has improved, although a comprehensive medium-term
expenditure framework has not yet been developed. The government regularly uses projections
and the budget strategy as inputs to annual budget formulation. Zero-based budgeting was
introduced and has been used since 2011. The overall level of public spending has expanded,
substantially supported by improved revenue performance.7 Government spending became more
pro-poor (primarily because of the new CCT program). In late 2018, the Philippine Congress
approved the Rice Tariffication Act, which abolished quantitative restrictions on rice imports. This
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 15
<<<PDF_PAGE_42>>>
act is expected to bring considerable budget savings from reduced rice subsidies. The quality of
sector spending has been enhanced through stronger accountability arrangements.8
The 2012 Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR) pointed to clear progress in
procurement compliance and the use of competitive procurement practices.9 Since 2012,
there has been gradual progress in procurement compliance, public access to procurement
information, and professionalization of the procurement cadre (as recommended in the 2012
CPAR). However, no progress has been made on some other recommendations of the CPAR,
such as establishment of an independent entity to handle procurement complaints and
expanded opportunities for foreign participation in public procurement.
The Bank Group–supported program contributed significantly to the government’s
expenditure rationalization effort. DPLs supported expansion in some core spending programs
(infrastructure) and the introduction of new ones (the CCT). Public expenditure reviews and
sector analytical work provided detailed recommendations to raise spending efficiency. Many of
those recommendations have been fully internalized and have become government policy. For
example, the Bank Group’s work on agriculture and rice subsidies helped the government to
shift resources toward more effective programs. Bank Group technical assistance contributed
to strengthening the capacity of the core economic agencies for budgeting, although there
remains significant room for improvement. The Bank Group’s contribution to procurement
reform has been critical. The CPAR’s regularly updated recommendations served as a “road
map” for the reform process. The Bank Group has developed a strong collaborative partnership
with the procurement regulator (Government Procurement Policy Board).
Transparency and Accountability in the Public Sector
Enhanced government transparency and accountability have been among the top priorities for
Bank Group assistance during the entire period under review. In addition to providing support
for PFM and procurement reforms, the Bank Group integrated governance dimensions into all
new operations and business processes.10 This was complemented by a diverse ASA program,
which included important diagnostic work and programmatic technical assistance.11 The Bank
Group also helped strengthen demand for accountability by investing in capacity building for
CSOs and establishing partnerships with entities engaged in policy advocacy and monitoring of
budget and service delivery. However, the feedback received by IEG during interviews suggests
that the Bank Group’s engagement with civil society has weakened in recent years.
Reforms initiated under the Aquino administration and supported by the Bank Group
strengthened governance and enhanced the quality of underlying institutions. These included
better budget reporting, expanded access to budget information, strengthened internal audit
and financial management capacity, and stronger budget alignment to development objectives.
There has also been significant progress under the Extractives Industries Transparency
Initiative. On social accountability, the Open Government Partnership and similar initiatives
created a platform for better budget analysis and more effective public advocacy. The
16 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 2
<<<PDF_PAGE_43>>>
education sector has seen significant gains from expanded monitoring by communities and
nongovernmental organizations.
Progress on governance reform slowed after 2014, and many reforms remain unfinished.
Despite achievements in PFM,12 progress in improving the capacity of line agencies for accurate
and timely expenditure reporting was limited. The country still lacks a modern government
integrated financial management information system (GIFMIS), which significantly reduces the
overall impact of reforms undertaken. The fragmented institutional structure for PFM in the
Philippines is the primary reason for repeated failures to develop a GIFMIS, and it has been
difficult to build a consensus on a reform strategy in the face of powerful stakeholders with
competing agendas. At the same time, there are signs of an emerging interagency (for example,
Department of Finance, Department of Budget and Management) consensus on medium-term
PFM reform priorities. These include rollout of a Budget and Treasury Management System (a
local substitute for GIFMIS) among the national government agencies in 2019, submission to
Congress of a comprehensive budget reform bill that reflects Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability report recommendations, transition to a cash budgeting system, and signing the
first reimbursable advisory services agreement with the Bank Group to provide implementation
support for PFM reform.
The Bank Group played an important and positive role in advancing reforms in this area. DPLs
supported adoption of a Unified Account Code Structure and introduction of new rules for
budget disclosure. Several sector projects successfully advanced governance objectives,
including more transparency in rural road planning, stronger accountability in financing
and operation of schools, and better anticorruption arrangements in the administration of
social transfers. The Bank Group made a major contribution to the gradual development of
interagency consensus on a longer-term PFM reform strategy. This was the result of a multiyear
Bank Group effort to build relationships with key local stakeholders, supported by large
volumes of diagnostic, advisory, and advocacy work, as well as considerable investment in
communication, mobilization, and education of various civil society groups.13
Decentralization and Local Government Strengthening
The Bank Group’s approach and engagement in this area have shrunk over time, in part
reflecting changes in government priorities. The 2009–13 CAS sought to refine the country’s
decentralization framework through broad-based reform and by strengthening local government
unit (LGU) service delivery. However, the government did not pursue decentralization reforms,
leading the 2014–19 CPS to reduce support to strengthening LGU capacity and enhancing
central government capacity to monitor LGU performance. These objectives were pursued
primarily through nonlending instruments.14 The main financing vehicle during the review period
was an investment project, “Support for Strategic Local Development” (2006–16), which
provided a credit line to LGUs through the Land Bank, primarily for modernization of water
supply systems. The project did not pursue broad policy objectives or aim to strengthen the
core governance functions of LGUs.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 17
<<<PDF_PAGE_44>>>
The absence of fresh lending to support local governments reduced the relevance of the
Bank Group–supported program. Delivery of numerous small ASA pieces did not maintain the
dialogue with and among government counterparts. The role and influence of the Bank Group
in this area has diminished noticeably, while other development partners have expanded their
footprint. Lack of sufficiently strong engagement at the subnational level became a binding
constraint to an effective assistance program in public services, including education, health,
and disaster risk management, all of which would have greatly benefited from improvements in
LGU capacity and governance.
Progress in strengthening local governance was uneven, with most structural problems in
the existing decentralization framework remaining largely intact, and LGUs remaining overly
dependent on central government transfers. The government dropped earlier plans for
comprehensive reform, including those intended to address overlapping service delivery
responsibilities across different government levels and the highly unequal distribution of
public expenditures and outcomes across regions, which is partly because of the formula for
allocation of intergovernmental fiscal transfers (World Bank 2011h). More ambitious reforms
are needed to ensure more equitable allocation of budget transfers across LGUs, enhance the
capacity to raise local taxes, and plan and effectively implement local development programs.
The government introduced new policies to monitor and incentivize LGU performance and
promote transparency and accountability, including the Seal of Good Local Governance
program, backed by budget performance grants to LGUs from the Performance Challenge
Fund.15 However, progress was not accompanied by equal strengthening of local capacity to
implement projects and deliver public services, as reflected in chronic underspending of local
budgets and stagnant LGU revenue collection.16
The Bank Group helped improve communication across central government agencies involved in
overseeing LGU performance but was less successful in advancing the governance agenda at the
local level. The Bank Group’s ASA helped strengthen the design and implementation of several
local governance programs at the central government level but was not able to develop working
partnerships at the subnational level.17 A significant part of its 2012 Local Governance Strategy
related to LGU capacity building remains unimplemented, undermining the efficiency of support for
delivery of core public services. A notable example of tangible support for enhancing subnational
capacity was the Philippine Rural Development Project (PRDP), which supported systematic
improvements in the capacity of participating provincial governments to plan and support local
rural development for infrastructure and specific agricultural value chains.18
18 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 2
<<<PDF_PAGE_45>>>
Conclusions
Table 2.2 summarizes the results and achievements in macroeconomic management and
governance.
TABLE 2.2 | Results in Macroeconomic Management and Governance
Sector or Area Results World Bank Group Contribution Ratinga
Macroeconomic Significant and sustained gains DPL series (2011–15) and technical S (5)
management in macroeconomic performance. assistance helped improve
and revenue Improved revenue performance. macroeconomic management,
mobilization implementing “sin tax” law, and
raising investor confidence.
Expenditure Expansion of public spending; DPLs supported expansion in S (5)
rationalization increase in the share of priority infrastructure and conditional
and pro-poor public spending; cash transfer spending. Advisory
improvement in budget planning and Services and Analytics helped raise
public procurement. spending efficiency and provide
support for procurement reform.
Transparency and Progress in strengthening The Bank Group supported reforms MS (4)
accountability in governance since 2010. Improved to enhance fiscal transparency and
the public sector Public Expenditure and Financial good governance, which played
Accountability scores. However, no an essential role in strengthening
progress reported after 2015. Several public demand for government
key reforms remain incomplete. accountability. More could have
been done.
Decentralization Progress in introducing new policies The Bank Group helped design and MU (3)
and local to promote local government implement several local governance
government transparency and accountability. programs, but it was not able to
strengthening However, no improvement in develop effective partnerships at
the regulatory framework for the subnational level and contribute
decentralization. Limited progress to strengthening local government
in strengthening local government capabilities.
capacity.
Overall rating MS (4)
Note: DPL = development policy loan.
a. The Independent Evaluation Group uses a 6-point rating scale, with 1 being the lowest and 6 the highest: HU (1) = highly
unsatisfactory; U (2) = unsatisfactory; MU (3) = moderately unsatisfactory; MS (4) = moderately satisfactory; S (5) = satisfactory; and HS
(6) = highly satisfactory.
The Bank Group’s engagement in improving macroeconomic management and governance is
rated moderately satisfactory. The Bank Group played an important supporting role and contributed
to improvements in macroeconomic management, progress in tax collection, better public
procurement, and more efficient public spending. Well-established partnerships at the technical
level across key government agencies made the Bank Group’s program delivery more effective
and helped sustain policy dialogue during periods of major political transition. The Bank Group’s
assistance in building proreform coalitions through policy advocacy and communication support was
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 19
<<<PDF_PAGE_46>>>
critical for the success of politically sensitive reforms. In such cases, World Bank communication
and other implementation support effectively complemented more traditional technical analysis and
policy advice.
The program was relevant and largely well aligned with the government’s development priorities, as
spelled out in the PDPs. Under the Aquino administration, the PDP objectives in this area were top
policy priorities. However, the relevance of the Bank Group’s support was somewhat diminished by
adjustments made in the 2017 PLR, which scaled down its support for governance. In retrospect, the
Bank Group could have reframed (rather than reduced) its governance engagements by, for example,
supporting reforms in local and SOE governance.
The most effective Bank Group interventions were in areas with strong government ownership.
Those included reforms in revenue mobilization, expansion in spending on core social programs, and
procurement reform. The effectiveness of assistance was boosted by the successful development of
partnerships with technical staff in key government agencies, which was sustained over the transition
to the new administration in 2016. Recent developments in PFM show promise of a breakthrough
in consolidating recent regulatory improvements and establishing a modern budget management
information system. If this happens, it would validate the longer-term programmatic effort of the Bank
Group and its partners in this area. The Bank Group made an effective contribution to strengthening
public demand for government accountability and transparency. However, it was not able to find
appropriate entry points and develop effective working partnerships at the subnational level. This
limited the effectiveness of its support to improve delivery of core public services.
The main achievements are likely to be sustainable because they are backed by strong government
ownership. Gains in macroeconomic management achieved under the DPL series have been largely
sustained, in part because the underlying reform program is perceived as government owned. The
Bank Group made a major contribution to a gradual development of broad interagency consensus
regarding the longer-term PFM action plan. Several Bank Group programs to strengthen CSO
capacity to promote accountability have been sustained.
The quality of the Bank Group’s knowledge services has been consistently high and appreciated by
the client, yet somewhat fragmented and, at times, supply-driven. The government especially valued
the Bank Group’s ability to bring relevant international experience and convincingly apply it to local
circumstances. The Bank Group’s main knowledge products were well disseminated and are known
to nongovernment players. However, the Bank Group could have made a more systematic effort to
engage local expertise (academia and think tanks) as partners in the delivery of its ASA program and
to enhance local analytical capacity. The large ASA program was sometimes fragmented, and its
contribution to CPS objectives was not properly monitored (World Bank 2018a). Some government
stakeholders noted that trust fund programming would have benefited from more consultation with
the client. It also placed too much emphasis on new analysis and policy advice at the expense of
providing additional support for implementation of reforms.
The World Bank can do more in this engagement area, building on earlier achievements, because
many reforms remain incomplete. In PFM, an absence of a modern GIFMIS system represents a
20 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 2
<<<PDF_PAGE_47>>>
significant constraint to further rationalization of public spending. The World Bank could leverage
the recent reimbursable advisory services agreement to expand engagement with the government
in the governance space to strengthen reform momentum. The priority for such an expansion could
be PFM (beyond GIFMIS support) and local and SOE governance. The effectiveness of the ASA
program could be improved by complementing basic diagnostics with implementation support
and engaging local think tanks and universities. Lack of progress on the decentralization agenda
has been a critical development constraint; the Bank Group was not able to develop effective
partnerships at the subnational level, and its contribution to strengthening LGU capabilities was
limited. Recent progress in strengthening subnational governance under the umbrella of PRDP
could become a model for future World Bank subnational interventions. In addition, more attention
is needed to strengthen public demand for government accountability. Closer engagement with civil
society groups would boost their capacity to advance the accountability agenda, including other
initiatives and specific programs under the previous Open Government Partnership country action
plans, such as Open Data and Bottom-Up Budgeting.
1 At the time of the evaluation, the World Bank was finalizing a new development policy loan to be submitted to the
Board in late FY19 to early FY20.
2 Some essential technical assistance activities were funded through the Programmatic Trust Fund funded by the
Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. The Report on Observance of Standards and Codes (2017) was
prepared jointly with USAID.
3 The Aquino administration committed to raise the tax-to-GDP (gross domestic product) ratio from 12.1 percent in 2010
to almost 16 percent in 2016. As of late 2018, national government tax revenues were approximately 15 percent of GDP.
Of 3 percent of the GDP tax increase, 2 percentage points reflected improvements in tax administration.
4 Several Advisory Services and Analytics products were prepared with grant support from Australia’s Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade. The latest Country Procurement Assessment Report was undertaken jointly with the Asian
Development Bank and the Japan International Cooperation Agency. In addition, the World Bank partnered with the
United Nations Children’s Fund and the World Health Organization on upgrading vaccine procurement. It also worked
with the Asian Institute of Management—a local think tank—on development of a new procurement training course.
5 The 2013 Climate Public Expenditure and Institutional Review developed recommendations to finance the Philippines’
climate reform agenda. The Basic Education Public Expenditure Review (FY13) recommended providing additional
resources to improve education quality.
6 This was done primarily through diagnostics under several Country Procurement Assessment Reports (the latest
published in FY12) and various technical assistance to implement the assessment report’s recommendations.
7 National budget allocations for infrastructure increased from 1.8 percent of GDP in 2010 to 4.5 percent in 2016 and
6.3 percent in 2017 (DBM data). Budget expenditures on health and education (combined) grew from 2.8 percent of
GDP to 3.9 percent and 4.6 percent of GDP during those same years.
8 This has been most prominent in the education sector, where more resources have been reaching schools because of
reforms in financing mechanisms, school management, textbook procurement, and community mobilization.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 21
<<<PDF_PAGE_48>>>
3
9 The Country Procurement Assessment Report score increased from 1.64 points (out of 3.00) in 2007 to 2.22 points in
2012. The Procurement Law was more strictly enforced, with 73 percent of the total value of government procurement
going through competitive public bidding, up from 3 percent in 2008.
10 Development policy loans directly supported better institutional arrangements for budget transparency and
accountability. The education project (Learning, Equity and Accountability Program, FY14) assisted in strengthening
accountability in schools and participatory school planning processes, the Social Welfare and Development Reform
Project aimed to improve governance within the social protection system, while the Community-Driven Development
Program provided support for strengthening downward accountability at the local level.
11 For example, Sector Governance Assessments (2011), Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability assessment
(2016), and Public Financial Management Reform Support technical assistance.
12 According to the 2016 Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability assessment, 17 of 28 indicators were rated
either A or B compared with only 8 in 2010.
13 Advice from the World Bank helped the government put together the Public Financial Management Public Action Plan
(2011), which then benefited from considerable World Bank implementation support. The World Bank also provided
technical assistance to help strengthen natural resource governance and meet commitments under the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative.
14 Several Advisory Services and Analytics products were delivered, covering the decentralization framework, the design
and implementation of local governance reforms, local service delivery, local business climate issues, and political
economy constraints for reforming local governance.
15 The results of the assessment under the Seal of Good Local Governance are used by the central government as
eligibility criteria for key antipoverty programs at the local level. The Bottom-Up Budgeting Program, launched in
2012, facilitated the participation of local communities and civil society organizations in both the programming and
subsequent monitoring of budget implementation by national agencies. Another recent program, Assistance for
Disadvantaged Municipalities, is intended to better reflect the variation in actual needs of local government units and
partially mitigate the inequality effects associated with the basic transfer allocation formula.
16 The consolidated local government unit budget surplus reached approximately 1 percent of GDP in both 2015 and
2016, reflecting the lack of local capacity to use available funding and implement local government programs.
17 For instance, the World Bank’s recommendation helped streamline a transfer of central government funds under the
Bottom-Up Budgeting Program to participating local government units and facilitated timely project implementation.
18 See chapters 3 and 4.
22 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 2
<<<PDF_PAGE_49>>>
3
THE PRIVATE SECTOR has been the main driver of growth
in the Philippines, but its potential to foster greater economic
inclusion remains largely underexploited. The private sector
generated 93 percent of the GDP and employed more than
Private Sector–
92 percent of the workforce. The service sector is the top
Led Growth
employer, with 56 percent of the nation’s workers; agriculture
employs 26 percent.1 However, business ownership remains
highly concentrated in the hands of a few large groups—up
to 76 percent of national wealth is estimated to be in the
hands of the 40 richest families (Habito 2012). SMEs account
for less than 8 percent of the total number of firms, and
92 percent are microenterprises. Large-scale companies
account for 0.3 percent—an indicator of a “missing middle” in
the economy.
A burdensome regulatory regime, large infrastructure
gap, lack of financial inclusion, and complex land tenure
system are among the main impediments to private sector–
led growth. The Philippines’ regulatory regime remains
ambiguous in many sectors of the economy, and corruption
is rampant in many areas. Doing Business (2019) ranked
the country 124th of 190 (20 places lower than in 2016).
Investments in infrastructure have not kept up with rapid
urbanization and population growth in the country. The
Global Competitiveness Index (2017–18) ranks the Philippines
113th of 137 countries in quality of infrastructure. Although
the country’s financial system remains stable and resilient,2
weak property rights and strict collateral requirements pose
an impediment for the poor in accessing finance, and close to
70 percent of the adult population continues to be outside the
formal financial system.3 The current rigid land tenure system
is a barrier to agribusiness growth (box 3.1). Rural areas lag in
economic growth and have higher rates of underemployment
because of the lack of access to capital, knowledge,
technology, and markets.
IInnddeeppeennddeenntt EEvvaalluuaattiioonn GGrroouupp || WWoorrlldd BBaannkk GGrroouupp 2233
<<<PDF_PAGE_50>>>
BOX 3.1 | Land Tenure System in the Philippines
The current land tenure system was established under colonial rule. It is neither efficient
nor effective, with multiple and conflicting laws, processes, and agencies on titling and
valuation; a poor land record information and management system; and a variety of
taxes on land transactions. These have created a highly inefficient and inequitable land
market in the country, with a negative impact on economic activity and government
revenue. Despite the presence of formal titles, the rental market remains inefficient at
allocating land. According to the Department of Agriculture, the farming population is
aging (the average age of farmers is 57 years old), and younger generations see no
future in farming despite, substantial government subsidies.
Source: Michler and Shively 2014.
The government’s development strategies list industry, services, sustainable agriculture,
infrastructure development, and a resilient financial system as priorities. The 2011–16 PDP identified
a weak investment climate as the main constraint to growth and set out strategies to improve it
through regulatory reform, infrastructure development, and PPPs.4 It stressed rural development
by advancing principles of inclusive growth, natural resource management, and local development.
The 2017–22 PDP called for reducing anticompetitive practices and barriers to entry, and expanding
economic opportunities in agriculture, forestry, and fisheries by improving productivity. According
to the 2009 and 2015 Enterprise Surveys, firms in the Philippines identified informality, corruption,
access to finance, and taxes as the main obstacles to private sector development (figure 3.1).
World Bank Group Program Focus and Results
Private sector–led growth was an integral part of Bank Group strategies. The 2009–13 CAS
had a strategic objective of “improving the investment climate,” and the 2014–19 CPS included
an engagement area on “rapid, inclusive, and sustained economic growth.” Both strategies
emphasized the “One Bank” principle—the World Bank and IFC would work together to catalyze
private participation in strategic investments. MIGA has had no exposure in the Philippines since
2000.5 According to IEG interviews with MIGA staff and local counterparts in the field, significant
improvements in the credit rating of the Philippines reduced the relevance of political risk providers
and brokers over the period, and MIGA was not able to generate new business because there was a
lack of demand.
24 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 3
<<<PDF_PAGE_51>>>
FIGURE 3.1 | Ranking of the Top Business Environment Obstacles for Firms
(Enterprise Surveys 2009 and 2015)
Informal competitors
Corruption
Access to finance
Tax rates
Electricity
Labor regulations
Access to land
Transport
Customs and trade regulations Philippines 2009
Licensing and permits Philippines 2015
Tax administration
Crime, theft, and disorder
Political instability
Poorly educated workers
Courts
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
percentage of firms
Source: http://www.enterprisesurveys.org/data/exploreeconomies/2015/philippines.
Four interrelated objectives can be distilled from the two Bank Group strategies on private sector
development. They include the following: (i) improved investment climate; (ii) increased access to
financial services; (iii) increased agricultural productivity, competitiveness, and rural incomes; and
(iv) better models of infrastructure finance and management, including PPPs.
Investment Climate
The Bank Group provided assistance for this objective mainly through World Bank DPLs and IFC
advisory support. The DPLs supported reforms aimed at streamlining procedures and computerizing
registration systems.6 IFC provided advisory support to the Task Force on Competition (later the
National Competitiveness Council), the Department of Agriculture on streamlining trade practices,
the Department of Finance and Land Registration Authority in drafting the Personal Property Security
Act to allow micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs) and farmers to use their movable assets
to access loans and to promote e-governance.
Some indicators show improvements in the business environment in some LGUs, but results are
inconclusive and were not replicated at the national level. Recently enacted laws on Competition
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 25
<<<PDF_PAGE_52>>>
(2015) and Doing Business (2018) are expected to reduce red tape. Similarly, the passage of bills on
land and valuation should ease land transactions.
The Bank Group contributed to policy development and streamlining processes (mainly in selected
subnational units). This included IFC advisories on shipping, cabotage, agricultural imports, and
drafting laws on Competition and Doing Business through the Trade and Competitiveness program.
IFC contributed to improving quarantine procedures to reduce the costs of complying with import
and export safety requirements. IFC assistance to the National Competitiveness Council was minor
compared with other development partners because its cost-recovery business model for advisory
services was not competitive relative to grant technical assistance offered by others.
Access to Financial Services
The Bank Group’s strategies targeted improving the delivery of and access to financial services.
IFC provided loans and equity investments to build relationships with banks, microfinance and
microinsurance institutions; advisory services to develop SME financial products (including in the
agriculture sector); and a risk-sharing facility for sustainable energy financing. IFC helped broaden
capital markets as an anchor investor in corporate and green bond issues (2016–18), although debt
capital markets in the Philippines are still shallow and dominated by government issuances.7
IFC engagement resulted in increased lending volumes to MSMEs by client banks, but not enough
to substantially improve access to finance for the poorest segments of the population. IFC supported
the financial sector mainly through continuous engagement with large banks and some microfinance
institutions. After the global financial crisis, IFC was the first foreign investor in a major bank with
co-investment from its Asset Management Company. Client financial institutions benefited from IFC’s
investments and advisory services, global expertise, and knowledge in SME product development,
including women-led businesses, agrifinance, and risk management, and were able to expand their
MSME lending volume significantly. However, growth in agrifinance and credit secured by movable
assets fell short of expectations, and financial inclusion levels have remained low. The 2014–19 CPS
introduced a financial inclusion target to respond to the 2011–16 PDP theme of inclusive growth.
The target was met according to the PLR, but the choice of the results indicator was not sufficiently
reflective of the actual outcome.8 Seventy percent of the adult population remain unbanked; only
11 percent have access to credit, and 12 percent save in a financial institution.9 Data on credit
secured by movable assets are not available.
Other activities had mixed results. The Credit Information Corporation decided not to follow IFC’s
recommendations to establish a credit information system in line with international standards
and currently does not function as the central depository of credit information. IFC supported the
development of the Personal Property Security Act (2018) to allow MSMEs and farmers to use
movable assets to secure loans. After typhoon Haiyan, an IFC advisory services project supported
development of a new indexed crop insurance product to protect farmers from catastrophe-related
losses. This was the first in the Philippines to be offered by a private company, the Center for
Agriculture and Rural Development Pioneer Micro-Insurance Incorporated, and the company has
issued 11,000 policies, with total coverage of $2.5 million.
26 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 3
<<<PDF_PAGE_53>>>
Agricultural Productivity, Competitiveness, and Rural Incomes
The flagship Bank Group instruments in this area were the MRDP and PRDP series.10 PRDP (an
ongoing nationwide project) was born out of success with a similar regional project, MRDP.11 PRDP
partners with LGUs and the private sector in providing infrastructure, facilities, technology, and
information. LGUs that participate in the project are required to prepare a Provincial Commodity
Investment Plan and business proposals for value chain development of commodities identified as
priorities and to provide counterpart funds of 10 percent to 20 percent (the remainder is a grant). Two
projects with similar objectives were canceled.12
There is clear evidence of progress on rural incomes, agricultural productivity, output value, rural
infrastructure, and local governance. PRDP developed a state-of-the-art monitoring and evaluation
framework through which progress on subprojects could be monitored online. In 2014–18,
household incomes and assets of target beneficiaries grew 15 percent to 20 percent, achieving the
target before project end. Incomes from on-farm activities increased 15 percent; nonfarm activities
increased as much as 67 percent. For enterprise beneficiaries, business plan projections indicate
at least a 30 percent increase in incomes. Agricultural productivity and the value of marketed
output of the projects’ target groups increased as well. Improvement in infrastructure substantially
reduced travel time in targeted rural areas.13 At the same time, support for income-generating
microenterprise activities aimed more at empowering beneficiary communities rather than enhancing
rural entrepreneurship. Because PRDP investments consist of grants of up to 80 percent (60 percent
project, 20 percent LGU-financed), they could potentially crowd out additional private investments.
The World Bank’s knowledge work and dialogue with civil society provided valuable insights into
agribusiness development in the Philippines. The World Bank supported the rural and agricultural
development agenda through programmatic ASA covering agricultural policy, productivity, and
agribusiness development. Technical assistance to the Department of Agriculture enhanced
institutional capacity and supported the preparation of the Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization
Plan (2011–16), a major input to the 2011–16 PDP.
Infrastructure Finance and Management, Including PPPs
IFC provided assistance to the government in implementing PPPs. IFC’s contribution was catalytic
in structuring pre-2010 PPP investments. Until the establishment of the PPP center in 2010, IFC was
one of the few in-country entities able to provide such expertise. IFC partnered with the Development
Bank of the Philippines to develop local PPP expertise (evaluation, preparation, structuring,
presentation, and implementation of PPPs) and recently helped structure the first hybrid PPP
transaction (Clark Airport).14
However, the actual impact of recent IFC engagement on PPPs largely remains to be seen because
most transactions either were not completed or are not yet operational. IFC successfully facilitated
the transaction for the development of the Ninoy Aquino International Airport Expressway (2013),
but other IFC-facilitated PPP projects are experiencing implementation delays, have not yet started
commercial operation, or are too recent to have produced visible results at the time of this evaluation.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 27
<<<PDF_PAGE_54>>>
Conclusions
Table 3.1 summarizes the results and achievements in private sector–led growth.
Achievement of the objectives in this area is rated moderately unsatisfactory. The Bank Group’s
program did register several important achievements during the period covered by this evaluation,
and its objectives were relevant to country needs and government priorities. However, operational
responses did not take advantage of potential World Bank–IFC synergies, and results were uneven
across engagement areas. The World Bank’s work on private sector development was not strategic,
and its analytics were mainly confined to sector and subsector-specific technical assistance. For
example, more results could have been achieved if there had been coordination among the World
Bank’s agriculture projects, such as PRDP and IFC’s Agri-Finance Advisory Program. There were
no MIGA guarantees since 2000. At the same time, Mindanao—a large island affected by ongoing
political volatility and unrest, with high economic potential—had potential for MIGA engagement.
Achievement of the objectives in this area is rated moderately unsatisfactory. The Bank Group’s
program did register several important achievements during the period covered by this evaluation,
and its objectives were relevant to country needs and government priorities. However, operational
responses did not take advantage of potential World Bank–IFC synergies, and results were uneven
across engagement areas. The World Bank’s work on private sector development was not strategic,
and its analytics were mainly confined to sector and subsector-specific technical assistance. For
example, more results could have been achieved if there had been coordination among the World
Bank’s agriculture projects, such as PRDP and IFC’s Agri-Finance Advisory Program. There were
no MIGA guarantees since 2000. At the same time, Mindanao—a large island affected by ongoing
political volatility and unrest, with high economic potential—had potential for MIGA engagement.
The private sector has been the driver of recent higher growth, but its potential remains constrained
by several factors. These include domination by large conglomerates, cumbersome regulations
(including those for land tenure) and red tape, a large infrastructure gap, and slow growth and low
incomes in agriculture, partly owing to lack of access to capital, technology, and markets. A large
percentage of the adult population continues to operate outside the formal financial system.
The Bank Group faced its own institutional hurdles in expanding engagement on private sector
development. These included pricing, an abundance of alternative financing sources for the
government and the private sector, and an ineffective application of the “One Bank” approach.
In the future, World Bank–IFC cooperation should extend beyond the exchange of information to
a more coordinated partnership. For example, the use of common task team leaders for project
implementation has proven to be a useful way to facilitate World Bank–IFC collaboration.15 A good
example of such cooperation in the Philippines was the effort to promote agribusiness investments
in Mindanao.
28 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 3
<<<PDF_PAGE_55>>>
TABLE 3.1 | R esults in Private Sector–Led Growth
World Bank Group
Sector or Area Results Contribution Ratinga
Improved Some progress on regulatory The World Bank Group
investment policy framework and institutional provided assistance on
climate capacity for business registration policy development. Results
MU (3)
and streamlining business processes on investment climate and
in selected LGUs. National-level business regulations limited.
indicators stagnant or deteriorating.
Increased access Increased lending volumes to IFC client banks benefited
to financial MSMEs. Financial inclusion of the from AS and increased lending
services poor still very limited. Limited (small volumes and products. IFC
scale) or no progress in agrifinance supported the first private
and securing credit through indexed crop insurance
movable assets. A centralized credit product. IFC gender finance
information system not operational. program with RCBC allowed MS (4)
the institution to lend more
than $120 million to more
than 2,000 women-owned
SMEs. Support for centralized
credit information system not
successful.
Increased Significant increase in household World Bank projects provided
agricultural incomes, assets, on-farm and an effective platform for
productivity, nonfarm activities, agricultural participatory rural development
S (5)
competitiveness, productivity, and value of the and income-generating
and rural incomes marketed output. Improved rural microenterprise activities.
infrastructure in targeted areas.
Better models Progress in implementing PPP as IFC helped structure earlier
of infrastructure the preferred model of infrastructure PPP investments and the first
finance and financing uneven, with many delays. hybrid PPP transaction (Clark
management, The government changed approach Airport). Most recent IFC-
MU (3)
including PPPs after 2016 to a hybrid model: public facilitated PPP transactions
financing of infrastructure combined were not operational or were
with private operations and canceled, except for the NAIA
maintenance. Expressway.
Overall rating MU (3)
Note: AS = advisory services; IFC = International Finance Corporation; LGU = local government unit; MSME = micro, small, and
medium enterprise; NAIA = Ninoy Aquino International Airport; PPP = public-private partnership; SME = small and medium enterprise;
RCBC = Rizal Commercial Banking Corporation.
a. The Independent Evaluation Group uses a 6-point rating scale, with 1 being the lowest and 6 the highest: HU (1) = highly
unsatisfactory; U (2) = unsatisfactory; MU (3) = moderately unsatisfactory; MS (4) = moderately satisfactory; S (5) = satisfactory; and
HS (6) = highly satisfactory.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 29
<<<PDF_PAGE_56>>>
The concentration of growth in a small group of large conglomerates was a major impediment
to realizing the potential for private sector–led inclusive growth. This “missing middle” has the
potential to boost the economy and accelerate poverty reduction if given the opportunity to
develop. The Bank Group could have helped address this challenge by developing an explicit
private sector development strategy, including advice on helping encourage competition,
introducing new technologies as a potential driver of growth, and taking advantage of the country’s
large youth population.
The PRDP model proved successful for improving rural incomes and promoting regional
development, but it has room for improvement. An integrated package with rural investments (IBRD)
linked to financing and financial inclusion efforts (IFC), combined with business development services
(private sector), could have enhanced the entrepreneurial capacity of smallholders and crowded
in additional investment from nonbeneficiaries. The large grant element helped secure benefits for
subsistence farming but diminished the demonstration effect: nonbeneficiaries attributed success to
the grant.
The PRDP platform could also help rural microentrepreneurs become the “missing middle” to boost
rural and regional economies. Instead of offering grants to rural entrepreneurs, the project could
facilitate access to finance, bundled with the necessary capacity building for beneficiaries to become
responsible borrowers and successful entrepreneurs. Future enterprise development components
could include demonstration, mentoring, and coaching.
The Bank Group’s efforts focused on improving access to finance rather than financial inclusion
more broadly. Financial inclusion efforts could have been more effective if they were combined with
greater attention to financial literacy. IFC’s financial sector engagement focused on banked segments
of the population by supporting credit expansion for SMEs and housing loans. Now that the banking
system is liquid and stable, IFC could shift resources to addressing the needs of the unbanked
population. IFC’s advisory services on financial literacy can be extended, redesigned, and expanded
to fit the needs of PRDP beneficiaries and possibly also CCT recipients through such mechanisms as
the Family Development Services.
1 Philippine Statistics Authority.
2 Philippine banks are well capitalized and liquid, with a total capital adequacy ratio at 15.3 in 2017 (well above the 10
percent regulatory minimum) and high liquid reserves to assets ratios varying from 25 to 45 percent over the past
decade. Nonperforming loans declined from an average of 2.6 percent of total loans in 2010 to 1.6 percent in 2017.
Credit has sustained growth rates (double digits since 2014).
3 http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/financialinclusion/brief/achieving-universal-financial-access-by-2020.
4 Total investment in the Philippines accounted for 14.7 percent of gross domestic product in 2008, contrasting with the
25 percent average observed in the East Asia and Pacific Region.
30 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 3
<<<PDF_PAGE_57>>>
5 The Philippines’s credit rating rose to investment grade in 2013, and in 2017 it reached “BBB.” These improvements
reduced the relevance of political risk providers and brokers over the period.
6 The development policy loan (DPL) prior actions focused on adopting an online business registration system—the
Philippines Business Registry (DPL1)—linking the system with two local government units (DPL2) and improving the
system’s functionality by introducing an e-payments system and integrating the ability to pay registration fees online
(DPL3).
7 Asian Development Bank. https://asianbondsonline.adb.org/economy/?economy=PH.
8 The Performance and Learning Review defined access to formal financial services as the share of population in the
lower 40 percent of income bracket with a bank account in a formal institution instead of the share of population (lower
percentile) that borrowed from a financial institution.
9 Universal Financial Access 2020, World Bank 2017 data. https://ufa.worldbank.org.
10 Other (smaller) projects and Advisory Services and Analytics also contributed to agricultural competitiveness, small-
scale rural infrastructure development, and rural employment generation. The International Finance Corporation
addressed agribusiness finance, insurance, and competitiveness aspects through its advisory services.
11 The Mindanao Rural Development Project operated first locally in Mindanao. The second Mindanao Rural
Development Project (2009–16, $83 million) was the second project of a four-phase 15-year adaptable program
loan and focused on strengthening rural public investment programs and reinforcing local government units,
while incorporating close involvement of rural communities in design and implementation. The Philippines Rural
Development Project started in 2014 and was originally to close in 2018, but was extended to 2021.
12 The Inclusive Partnership for Agricultural Competitiveness project (2017) planned to help improve access to markets
and enhance the competitiveness of smallholder farmers but was canceled because of a disagreement between
the World Bank and the government over how to address land tenure issues. The Joint World Bank–IFC Harnessing
Agribusiness Opportunities through Robust and Vibrant Entrepreneurship Supportive of Peaceful Transformation
project was to promote agribusiness investment in Mindanao but was dropped in 2015 because of disagreement with
the government.
13 The Philippines Rural Development Project Implementation Status Report reports that, as of December 2018, overall
travel time had been reduced by 52 percent (from 10.1 to 4.8 minutes per kilometer).
14 In the hybrid public-private partnership formula, the government selects, finances (including borrowing at lower rates
through grants and concessional loans), and builds big-ticket projects through competitive public bidding and, on
completion, auctions off operations and maintenance to the private sector.
15 One recent example observed by the Independent Evaluation Group was in the Kyrgyz Republic. See World Bank
2019a.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 31
<<<PDF_PAGE_58>>>
4
AFTER DECADES OF PERSISTENTLY HIGH poverty
and lagging human development, the Philippines has achieved
more positive results in the past decade. Many Filipinos were
living just above the poverty line, moving in and out of poverty
Better Services
because of their vulnerability to shocks. Between 2003 and
for the Poor
2009, 44 percent of the population was poor at least once, and
the Philippines was off target to meet the MDGs, particularly on
health and education. However, robust economic growth since
2010 has helped reduce the national poverty rate by an average
of 1.2 percent per year during 2012–15 (World Bank 2018c). An
improved fiscal situation permitted allocation of more resources
to social protection, health, education, and service provision,
which helped achieve key MDGs.
Despite recent positive developments and the high likelihood of
achieving UMIC status before 2022, the country needs to make
progress in several areas. The national poverty rate is still high
at 21.6 percent (2015), and education and health outcomes lag
behind other UMICs in the region (table 4.1 and figure 4.1). Many
local governments lack the capacity to fund, manage, and
maintain the infrastructure needed to provide basic services to
the poor in their localities. The CCT program has succeeded
in recipients’ behaviors (increased enrollment, decreased
dropouts, increased visits to health clinics, vaccination), but
there is limited evidence of impact on final outcomes (learning,
stunting, maternal mortality).
Policies and programs for poverty reduction and human
development for the poor were a priority for the government
throughout the review period. The PDP 2011–16 enumerated a
long list of priorities for social development. The plan translated
President Aquino’s “Social Contract with the Filipinos” in
promoting inclusive growth and equitable access to quality
basic social services, especially for the poor and vulnerable.
The Duterte administration continues to emphasize the need for
32 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 4
<<<PDF_PAGE_59>>>
inclusive growth and has placed an emphasis on the need for infrastructure for productive sector
development and improved quality of life for the poor.
TABLE 4.1 | Selected Economic and Human Development Indicators
Philippines EAP World
Indicators Average 2008–17
GDP growth (annual
5.6 4.3 2.4
percent)
GNI per capita, Atlas
2,992 8,665 10,064
method (current $)
Life expectancy at birth,
68.6 74.7 71.2
total (years)
Mortality rate, infant (per
23.8 16.2 34.3
1,000 live births)
School enrollment,
secondary (percent 85.5 85.2 73.3
gross)
School enrollment,
31.7 33.4 32.1
tertiary (percent gross)
Population growth
1.6 0.7 1.2
(annual percent)
Source: World Development Indicators, DataBank, September 21, 2018.
Note: EAP = East Asia and Pacific Region; GDP = gross domestic product; GNI = gross national income.
World Bank Group Program Focus and Results
Bank Group programs fall into three engagement areas: (i) poverty measurement and social protection,
(ii) better service delivery in municipalities and communities, and (iii) human capital development.
Poverty Measurement and Social Protection
Throughout the review period, the World Bank supported the government’s efforts to build an
integrated social protection system. The 2009–13 CAS prioritized making the CCT program
fully operational and increasing coverage of the poor. The World Bank helped with expansion,
consolidation, and implementation of the 4Ps CCT program through the SWDRP,1 programmatic
ASA, updating the Listahanan poverty database,2 and use of the database for other
government programs. The 2014–19 CPS had a more explicit focus on poverty measurement,
but the associated results indicator was removed in the 2017 PLR as part of the simplification of
the results framework. Programmatic ASA informed the policy dialogue on poverty, vulnerability,
prosperity, and inclusive growth, with emphasis on ensuring accurate and timely statistics.
In 2018, the World Bank produced a Poverty Assessment (World Bank 2018c), a rigorous
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 33
<<<PDF_PAGE_60>>>
FIGURE 4.1 | Poverty Head Count Ratio at $1.90 and Gini Index
(percent of population)
40 45
35 40
35
30
30
25
25
20
20
15
15
10
10
5 5
0 0
2002/03 2005/06 2008/09 2012 2015
PHL (Poverty) Developing EAP Lower MICs
Upper MICs PHL (Gini - rhs)
Source: World Development Indicators data; East Asia and Pacific Poverty Portal data.
Note: Ratio data are 2011 purchasing power parity. EAP = East Asia and Pacific; MIC = middle-income country; PHL = the Philippines.
assessment of why growth in the Philippines has not resulted in as much poverty reduction as
in other East Asian countries.
The CCT program rollout contributed significantly to poverty reduction. After the establishment
of the Listahanan in 2009, the 4Ps CCT program moved beyond the pilot phase; approximately
4 million poor households with almost 9 million children were receiving CCT grants by the end
of 2013. According to the 2018 Poverty Assessment, 25 percent of the reduction in poverty
since the program started is attributable to social transfers and 1.5 million people have moved
out of poverty.
By many accounts, the impact of the program on modifying behaviors of the poor has been
significant. An impact evaluation carried out for the 4Ps in 2012 found significant positive
impacts on both education and health of the poor (World Bank 2013c). The smooth and rapid
implementation of the program and the positive response of beneficiaries resulted in almost
universal rates of compliance with health and education conditions. The family development
sessions, which are provided monthly for 4Ps members, cover a range of topics designed to
enhance the general well-being of the family, including hygiene, family planning, emergency
preparedness, waste management, and others. According to field interviews, the program has
contributed to women’s empowerment through the payment of the benefit to women and the
participation of women in the sessions. Evidence also shows that 4Ps had reduced the number
34 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 4
<<<PDF_PAGE_61>>>
of incidents of violent insurrection in the areas where it had been introduced (Crost, Felter, and
Johnston 2016).
The World Bank played a key role in promoting and helping to implement the CCT program. Since
the mid-2000s, the World Bank has demonstrated the potential of a CCT program for both poverty
reduction and enhanced educational and health outcomes. The World Bank supported South-South
dialogue that helped ensure the government’s ownership of the program. Government officials and
politicians were taken on study tours to Turkey, Brazil, Mexico, and Colombia, and conferences
were set up to discuss programs in those countries. The World Bank provided extensive technical
advice and implementation support to get the Listahanan and 4Ps off the ground and ensure their
continuation. This evaluation concurs with the high ratings accorded to the program by project
evaluations but also cautions against possible stagnation, signs of which have been exhibited by the
program more recently. 4Ps currently faces significant challenges, including the need to maintain
initial high levels of targeting accuracy by using the Listahanan updated beneficiary list and ensuring
coverage of indigenous peoples and the homeless and developing and putting in place a strategy for
graduation from the list.
Service Delivery in Municipalities and Communities
The World Bank faced challenges in finding entry points for engagement at the local level.
The widely recognized infrastructure gap—particularly large outside the Metro Manila area—is
compounded by the lack of administrative capacity and poor governance at the local level.
Local governments are often riddled with elite capture, and programs undertaken at the
municipal level are subject to rent-seeking by local power structures. During the review period,
the World Bank used several mechanisms for engagement. They included the KC-NCDD
programs,3 the MRDP-PRDP series, and a range of activities designed to support larger-scale
infrastructure development in cities.
The World Bank helped achieve results through CDD engagement, although a few elements
of the program may need rethinking and fine-tuning. The World Bank helped convert a
program providing funding to mayors for local infrastructure into a genuine CDD program with
community empowerment, in part through exposure of local officials and politicians to the
positive experience of the Kecamatan Development Program in Indonesia. KC-NCDD seems
to have avoided elite capture; few of the grievances heard through the grievance process
related to undue influence. The program has made an impressive start in integrating community
activities that fall within the responsibility of the Department of Social Welfare and Development,
and the next step is to integrate other departments at the municipal level. At the same time,
the maintenance of infrastructure by municipalities is likely to present challenges, and rules
governing the choice of subprojects may be too constraining in terms of short completion
cycle and a low-cost ceiling. The original design of the KC-NCDD included objectives relating
to community empowerment, provision of priority infrastructure, and mainstreaming CDD
principles into local development planning and service delivery by providing capacity building
support to LGUs. This was to be accomplished by aligning KC-NCDD with the Bottom-
up Budgeting initiative and local development planning processes. Uncertainty about the
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 35
<<<PDF_PAGE_62>>>
intentions of the current administration and shortfalls in capacity building at the LGU level pose
risks to achieving this convergence. Elements of the project’s strategy—the “CDD principles”
and approaches—may not be sustained when the project closes.
PRDP followed in the footsteps of a similar successful subnational project, the MRDP, by scaling
the project up to the national level and widening its scope. PRDP mainly finances rural infrastructure
(farm-to-market roads), but it also promotes local livelihoods (increased income through better
employment opportunities and productivity), local entrepreneurship, and improved capacity of LGUs
for planning and implementation. This platform provides mechanisms for participatory planning,
implementation, and governance that build capacity at local, regional, and central levels.
Strengthening local government capacity for service delivery remains a major challenge in the
Philippines, but some models of engagement show promise. The KC-NCDD and PRDP suggest
there are ways to engage effectively at the local level by building instruments that are subject to
participation and surveillance—from the barangay (village level) up to the municipality for KC-
NCDD and from the provincial level down to communities for PRDP. There is also scope for more
benchmarking of service delivery at the local level. A strong case can also be made for piloting
different approaches with local governments that could form the basis for a broader program.
Disaster “hot spots” are one obvious area where the need for an integrated approach to planning
and management—not just of disaster preparedness and relief, but of the resilience of all local
programs—could form the basis of a regional intervention to demonstrate the possibilities and
benefits of clean and effective government.
Human Capital Development
In the mid-2000s, the Philippines was struggling to achieve the MDGs for health and education.
The country had the lowest budget allocations for education and health as shares of GDP and
public expenditure of any Southeast Asian country. The World Bank provided support through a
series of projects in education and health, which were completed by 2012–13.4 The 2009–13 CAS
gave priority to MDG outcomes, including indicators for primary and secondary enrollment rates,
completion rates, reduced infant mortality, greater immunization coverage, better prenatal health,
and tuberculosis treatment. The 2014 CPS was an integrated multisectoral program as opposed to
number of separate single-agency sector investment projects.
The World Bank continues to have a significant presence in both the education and health
sectors, even without direct lending. The 2014 CPS shifted focus in education from access to
quality. The SWDRP supports cash transfers to the poor conditional on school attendance,
vaccination, and regular checkups for young children, while the KC-NCDD provides support
for the construction of classrooms and health centers, including access roads. Analytic work
provides just-in-time support to different government agencies. In education, this started with
the education public expenditure review and continued with programmatic support through
policy briefs on the Department of Education’s finance policies to make resource allocation
36 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 4
<<<PDF_PAGE_63>>>
more equitable and facilitate better quality service delivery. In health, there was a particular
focus on studies and technical assistance to support implementation of the national health
insurance program. Nutrition is emerging as a major area in which the World Bank may be able
to play a role by bringing together agencies addressing stunting, which continues to afflict a
large number of children and adults.
The MDGs were an important wake-up call for the authorities on the extent to which the country was
lagging in human development. There was a substantial increase in budget allocations for health and
education. The World Bank’s support for the CCT program helped motivate better results in health
and education, while the introduction of Universal Health Care enabled the poor to benefit from the
expansion of health services. As a result, there was considerable progress between 2005 and 2015
in education enrollment, attended deliveries, and infant and under-five mortality.
Progress has been slow in other areas, especially compared with countries with similar per
capita income. These include high levels of stunting, maternal mortality, disease incidence, low
immunization coverage, limited results on education among the poor, and stagnation in quality
of education. Only 31 percent of the poor have completed secondary education and 2 percent
have benefited from tertiary education compared with 59 percent and 15 percent of the nonpoor,
respectively (World Bank 2018c). The country did not achieve MDG targets 4.3 and 5 related to
maternal and child health. In addition, despite the expansion of funding for health insurance, out-of-
pocket expenses on health remain high and are a significant factor in households’ vulnerability to
falling back into poverty.
The success of the Philippines in achieving better results is partly due to increased sector
budget allocations supported by World Bank analysis and lending. The World Bank’s 2010 public
expenditure review in education set the stage for the World Bank’s work, contributing to the
consensus around the need for the expansion of government expenditures. In addition, World
Bank lending supported significant management reforms in education, which included more
effective school-based management, textbook procurement, and community monitoring of school-
based investments. This ensured that more resources reached schools. A particularly important
contribution came through analytic work, which demonstrated the potential role that additional “sin
taxes” could have in providing financing for health insurance and enabling the expansion of health
insurance coverage through PhilHealth to the poor. The 4Ps support for school attendance brought
many poor children into the educational system. The World Bank’s health projects helped achieve
a decline in the tuberculosis incidence rate, an increase in the use of health services by the poor,
and an increase in the number of facility-based deliveries, but they were less successful in raising
the childhood immunization rate, expanding the use of family planning, and improving women’s
health outcomes. Performance monitoring in education remains a major weakness. It is very
difficult to assess whether there is improvement in comparable test scores even using the National
Achievement Test, let alone using internationally consistent data.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 37
<<<PDF_PAGE_64>>>
Conclusions
Table 4.2 summarizes the results and achievements in better services for the poor.
TABLE 4.2 | R esults in Better Services for the Poor
Sector or Area Results World Bank Group Contribution Ratinga
Poverty measurement An effective system of poverty World Bank analytical work and
and social protection measurement is in place; loans informed or supported the
CCT transfers contributed implementation of both Listahanan S (5)
substantially to poverty and 4Ps.
reduction.
Better service delivery Considerable progress (from World Bank interventions through
in municipalities and a low base) has been made, KC-NCDD and PRDP improved
communities but it is an overall area of services in rural areas, but many
weakness, especially in relation systemic issues, including urban MS (4)
to lack of administrative poverty, remain unaddressed.
capacity at the local level and
heavily centralized governance.
Human capital Access objectives were The World Bank made important
development substantially achieved. Health contributions to access for the
outcomes have been mixed. poor to education and health. The
Prospects for enhancements program for quality enhancements
in education quality remain has potential, but there is no MS (4)
unclear. Health insurance adequate monitoring of quality in
has expanded to assist the place and no public availability of
poor, but large out-of-pocket information.
expenses remain an issue.
Overall rating MS (4)
Note: 4Ps = Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program; CCT = conditional cash transfer; KC-NCDD = Kapit-Bisig Laban sa Kahirapan-
Comprehensive and Integrated Delivery of Social Services national community-driven development; PRDP = Philippine Rural
Development Project.
a. The Independent Evaluation Group uses a 6-point rating scale, with 1 being the lowest and 6 the highest: HU (1) = highly
unsatisfactory; U (2) = unsatisfactory; MU (3) = moderately unsatisfactory; MS (4) = moderately satisfactory; S (5) = satisfactory; and HS
(6) = highly satisfactory.
Overall rating for this engagement area is moderately satisfactory. The World Bank’s program was
relevant to the country’s development objectives and has helped maintain a focus on links among
social protection, service delivery, and poverty reduction. The subpillar on poverty measurement
and social protection fully achieved its objectives and included some examples of good practice.
The main achievements include the contribution to poverty targeting and measurement through
Listahanan and the development of the CCT. The KC-NCDD and PRDP programs made significant
contributions to the quality of life in rural households by making villages more accessible and
providing other much-needed social and economic infrastructure. The reform of “sin taxes” helped
expand funding for the national health insurance program, PhilHealth. The PRDP is an interesting
38 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 4
<<<PDF_PAGE_65>>>
model that works around the problems of elite capture and rent-seeking in municipalities in an
effective manner. The World Bank had substantial engagement in education and skills through
analytical work and was the primary producer of analytical work on education in the Philippines,
which helped guide government policy priorities.
Multisector operations have been the most successful part of World Bank programs. The SWDRP,
KC-NCDD, and PRDP programs are all considered flagships. Even when implemented by one
department, they inevitably bring in others to meet their objectives. The World Bank has provided
the necessary long-term commitment and oversight to programs that address these links to help
successive administrations keep them in place. Nonetheless, it may be necessary to revise and
repackage these programs to ensure ownership by new administrations. Once ownership is re-
established, these programs may need to be reinvigorated by adapting them to address emerging
issues. It might be possible to use the 4Ps to fund scholarships for poor children who maintain good
grades at school or to provide rewards at the community level for communities that perform well in
improving child height and weight relative to a baseline. The World Bank could support the piloting of
innovative approaches as it did in the early days of the program.
The World Bank’s support for health and education was less successful. The World Bank had
substantial engagement in education and skills through analytical work but had limited success
in promoting sector-specific operations in health and education, despite considerable efforts.
The World Bank’s analytical work and “national” projects in health and education made major
contributions to access, but stubborn problems persisted for quality of education, inadequate family
planning, and poor nutrition. In the education sector, the World Bank could do more to support a
higher quality monitoring framework.
Sustainability of achievements in this area requires continued attention, particularly in light of political
cycles and the frequent reluctance of administrations to follow up on the policies and achievements
of their predecessors. The achievements of “flagship” programs may be limited if there is no effort to
follow up, update, and institutionalize them further. The CDD program has been an important success,
but questions arise about how to graduate from it as a country moves up the income ladder.
Lack of progress on decentralized service delivery and limited administrative capacity at the local
level continued to be impediments to the government’s ambitious goals. Current institutional
structures disproportionately benefit the political and economic elite, and there is a reluctance
to support a genuine decentralization by strengthening and enhancing the autonomy of local
government institutions. The geography of the Philippines adds to the challenges of a Manila-based
government assessing local needs and responding to local priorities. The World Bank could develop
a more integrated program of support for municipal infrastructure, using KC-NCDD and PRDP
as entry points, and supporting efforts to upgrade municipal governments’ quality of governance
and capacity for implementation. The World Bank could consider piloting an integrated model of
local government support in some of the disaster hot-spot provinces, where resilience needs to be
incorporated into public investment programs.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 39
<<<PDF_PAGE_66>>>
1 Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program (Bridging Program for the Filipino Family, also known as 4Ps), is a conditional
cash transfer program of the Philippine government.
2 Listahanan or the National Household Targeting System for Poverty Reduction is an information management system
that currently includes 15 million households.
3 Kalahi-CIDSS stands for Kapit-Bisig Laban sa Kahirapan (Linking Arms against Poverty) Comprehensive and
Integrated Delivery of Social Services (CIDSS). This builds on the government’s Comprehensive and Integrated
Delivery of Social Services program that started in 2002 and channeled funding for infrastructure through municipal
mayors.
4 P075464 NP Support for HNP (closed in FY12); P079628 Second Women’s Health and Safe Motherhood (closed in
FY13); P094063 National Program Support for Basic Education (closed FY13).
40 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 5
<<<PDF_PAGE_67>>>
5
Disaster Risk Management
THE PHILIPPINES IS THE THIRD-MOST disaster-
prone country in the world and is likely to experience even more
frequent and intense climate-related disasters in the future.
Strengthening
Natural disasters disproportionately affect the poor and have
Resilience
caused an estimated $23 billion in losses and damage since
to Natural
1990. On average, more than 1 million Filipinos are impoverished
Disasters,
each year by natural disasters.1 Under pressure of rapid growth
Climate
and urbanization, infrastructure has not been designed to the
Change, and
standards of resilience required to withstand natural disasters.
Violent Conflicts
The main concerns include risk of flooding, inadequate water
and sanitation systems, and pollution. Metro Manila, with
a population of 13.7 million, is prone to flooding, which has
worsened with urban sprawl and the increasing number of
migrants. Migrants typically have low-paying jobs, are unable
to afford decent housing, and often end up living in danger
zones. The National Housing Authority estimates that there are
approximately 600,000 informal settler families in Metro Manila,
equivalent to 20 percent of Metro Manila’s total population.
There has been progress in improving the water supply in
the last 20 years, but progress in sewerage and solid waste
collection is lagging. Only 15 percent of water consumers are
connected to sewer lines.
Pollution and waste resulting from industrial development are
a major source of concern. Solid waste collection efficiency
in Metro Manila is estimated at 80 percent; the remaining
20 percent is either burned in backyards, left on the streets,
or disposed of in waterways. Agricultural practices on steep
slopes, the use of chemicals, and mining activities have
removed vegetative cover from many hillsides, causing erosion
and landslides.
The government changed its approach to disaster risk
management in response to the series of natural disasters that hit
the country in 2009, and especially after 2013, when the country
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 41
<<<PDF_PAGE_68>>>
was hit almost simultaneously by a magnitude 7.2 earthquake and the devastating typhoon Haiyan.
A new Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act was passed in 2010, coupled with a Strategic
National Action Plan for disaster risk reduction and management. The Disaster Risk Financing and
Insurance Strategy anticipated improving financing at the national level, providing local governments
with additional funds, and empowering poor and vulnerable households and SMEs to restore their
livelihoods quickly. After inadequate responses to natural calamities revealed a lack of coordination
among government agencies, legislation to create a national Department of Disaster Resilience was
proposed in 2018.
World Bank Group–Supported Program Focus and Results
Both Bank Group strategies, the 2009–13 CAS and 2014–19 CPS, supported the government in
building resilience to natural disasters, including through infrastructure investments (water supply,
sanitation, and sewerage). The World Bank–supported program has two subpillars:
(i) resilience, including financial, structural, and nonstructural resilience to natural disasters; and
(ii) infrastructure, including water supply, sanitation, sewerage, and irrigation. The Bank Group
helped the government develop and implement the Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance
Strategy through a mix of DPLs (with a CAT DDO option) and investment project financing,
as well as a range of knowledge products and capacity building activities. IFC supported the
development of a new indexed crop insurance product—the first of its kind in the Philippines—to
protect farmers from catastrophe-related losses. Policies supported by DPLs signaled a switch in
disaster risk reduction management in the Philippines from a reactive to a proactive approach and
were designed to be mainstreamed at the LGU and provincial levels. However, implementation of
disaster risk reduction and management strategies at the local level remains a serious concern
because of capacity and governance constraints.
The Bank Group helped the country become better prepared for natural disasters with a large
number of ASA and considerable investment financing. ASA included work on seismic activity
monitoring, revised building codes for public buildings, and the protection of cultural assets. Learning
from the experience of other countries (including Japan, Mexico, and Turkey), along with World
Bank advice, prepared the ground for initiating the establishment of the Department of Disaster
Resilience in 2018.2 In addition, the World Bank contributed to the draft of the Flood Management
Master Plan (2014) with priority investments outlined until 2025 and followed up with an investment
project (Metro Manila Flood Management project, 2017) and preparation of a flood-diversion dam
project. In the housing sector, the World Bank played an influential role in developing a resettlement
and postdisaster shelter program and preparing a cost-benefit analysis of in-city versus off-city
resettlement that led to an evidence-based debate among stakeholders. The Global Partnership on
Output-Based Aid project (with funding from IFC) improved access to water services in the east zone
of Metro Manila. The project increased connections from 4,000 to 28,500 households. The number
of poor people benefiting from connections to water supply increased from 20,000 to 142,000, and
recurrent costs for water expenditures decreased from 13 percent of monthly spending to as low as
1 percent (World Bank 2013b).
42 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 4
<<<PDF_PAGE_69>>>
Conclusions
Table 5.1 summarizes the results and achievements in disaster risk management.
TABLE 5.1 | Results in Disaster Risk Management
World Bank Group
Sector or Area Results Contribution Rating
Disaster risk Relevant sector strategies and Facilitated dialogue on a new
management policies in place. Legislation risk financing strategy and
to establish Department of mechanism at the central
Disaster Resilience proposed. government level. Financing
Comprehensive flood instruments (two development
management plan developed for policy loans with a catastrophe
Metro Manila. Sewerage and solid deferred drawdown option,
waste management fell short of a disaster bond, the Disaster
MS (4)
expectations. Low implementation Risk Financing and Insurance
capacity at the local level poses program, IFC-facilitated crop
risks to resilience. insurance) contributed to
increased resilience. Facilitated
private sector involvement in
water and sanitation sectors.
Limited results on the local
level.
Note: The Independent Evaluation Group uses a 6-point rating scale, with 1 being the lowest and 6 the highest: HU (1) = highly
unsatisfactory; U (2) = unsatisfactory; MU (3) = moderately unsatisfactory; MS (4) = moderately satisfactory; S (5) = satisfactory; and HS 6)
= highly satisfactory.
The achievement of objectives in disaster risk management is rated moderately satisfactory.
The objective of increased resilience to natural disasters was achieved to a large extent, with
shortcomings in impact at the local government level and for sewerage connections and
wastewater treatment.
The sustainability of hard-won gains in disaster risk management seems likely given the
administration’s interest in resilience and infrastructure and larger budget allocations. Aided
by two DPLs with a CAT DDO, budget spending on disaster risk management increased
significantly. During 2011–16, the government requested a series of three CAT DDOs: two
from the World Bank and one from the government of Japan. It also diversified its disaster
emergency and contingency funding, including insurance and catastrophe bonds, to better
withstand and respond to natural disasters.
There have been tangible improvements in the country’s capacity to deal with disasters.
Progress was made on two fronts. First, better preparedness helped reduce the damage from
typhoons. Second, the availability of new financing instruments allowed for much quicker
disbursement of funds to accelerate postdisaster recovery. Also, the Department of Finance
developed a joint catastrophe risk insurance program in which 25 LGUs participated.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 43
<<<PDF_PAGE_70>>>
The Bank Group’s strategy and objectives were broadly aligned with and relevant to the
government’s goals but may need an update. In the past decade, the World Bank’s strategy
focused mostly on the national level. The Philippines now has in place comprehensive state-
of-the-art strategies and plans for disaster-relevant sectors and subsectors. The Bank Group
helped develop the broader policy platform, such as the Disaster Risk and Insurance Strategy
and the Metro Manila Flood Management Plan, from which other donors can now choose
segments to finance. The current binding constraint is at the local government level, especially
related to awareness and low implementation capacity of disaster risk management budgets.
In most respects, the Bank Group’s program achieved its objectives of increasing resilience
to natural disasters. World Bank engagement on disaster risk management made finances
available in the immediate aftermath of a disaster, through both DPLs, a CAT DDO, and support
for a Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance Strategy. Relevant agencies demonstrated high
ownership of the disaster risk management reform agenda. There was considerable progress
in all areas of the policy program: institutional capacity building, mainstreaming development
planning, and managing fiscal exposure to natural hazards. At the agency level, the Department
of Finance worked with the Department of Social Welfare and Development to create a system
of postdisaster cash transfers through the 4Ps CCT system. At the community level, the Kalahi-
CIDSS program uses infrastructure designs that are resilient to disasters. In addition, the family
development sessions under this program provided information on how to prepare for—and
recover from—natural disasters.
However, the use of disaster preparedness information and the understanding of risk at the
provincial and especially LGU levels are still weak. Comprehensive approaches similar to the Metro
Manila flood management plan (taking the whole watershed of Metro Manila into account and using
it for a sequence of investment projects) are needed in other areas, particularly disaster hot spots
such as Northern Luzon and Eastern Visayas. Now that the country has successfully updated its
policies and early warning systems, the World Bank will need to follow the national-level policy
dialogue on disaster risk management with investment projects that strengthen capacity and
systems at the local level.
The World Bank’s extensive ASA program on disaster risk management allowed for continued
involvement in the sector, even in periods without major direct lending. ASA demonstrated tangible
and lasting results through its influence on government policies, investment programs, and
collaboration. Despite being somewhat ad hoc, the ASA covered a wide array of issues and enabled
the World Bank to be ready with relevant information when there was an opening on the side of the
government, thereby helping achieve breakthroughs at the policy level. The World Bank also made
use of its convening power to bring together a large community of stakeholders to share digital rights
management information and analytical assessments.
44 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 5
<<<PDF_PAGE_71>>>
Climate Change and Environment
Climate change adaptation and mitigation, clean environment, and environmental protection
have featured prominently in government strategies. The Philippines’ increasing vulnerability
to natural disasters places it at the forefront of international climate dialogue and explains the
priority assigned to climate change by recent administrations.3 Climate action was a clear
priority in communications during the Aquino administration, both within the country and
internationally. Although climate change adaptation and mitigation appear to be less prominent
in government documents under the Duterte administration, the country has generally stayed
on track with its climate change reform agenda.
The government’s climate change strategy, policies, and related institutional arrangements still
need to be fully implemented. Low-carbon development (mitigation efforts) lacks a common
strategy. Related action has been seriously delayed—or even reversed—in the energy and
transport sectors. Low capacity for climate action (both adaptation and mitigation) at the local
level causes delays in developing and integrating the climate change action plans of LGUs. The
climate reform agenda is not consolidated across sectors at the national level, and distribution
of responsibilities for implementation of the National Climate Change Action Plan is not clear.
The government’s mitigation and adaptation strategies have followed different tracks. On
mitigation, progress has been delayed. The country’s electricity sector strategy prioritizes the
least-cost approach at the expense of a low-carbon one: renewable resources are available,
but coal plants are still being built. Greenhouse gas emission mitigation across sectors is
insufficient. Adaptation and resilience reforms demonstrate an opposite trend: much more
has been done and there is a continuation of policies and significant investment, although the
current administration is less vocal.
World Bank Group–Supported Program Focus and Results
Bank Group strategy documents for the period reviewed mainstreamed climate change
mitigation and adaptation. According to the Bank Group’s Climate Change Action Plan (2016),
the Philippines is one of the countries where mainstreaming climate considerations into World
Bank policies and budgets was successful (World Bank 2016c). Support for continued climate
change reform in the Philippines is provided for all high-impact areas: renewable energy and
energy efficiency, sustainable mobility, sustainable cities, climate-smart land use, water,
food security, green competitiveness, and leaving no one behind. Within the climate change
engagement area, mitigation projects were mainly in energy, transport, waste management
(related to coastal water pollution), and climate finance; adaptation projects were mostly in
environment, agriculture, and forestry.
With regard to mitigation, expected outcomes in the CAS and CPS included lowering climate
change risks, reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and scaling up clean energy. The Bank Group’s
knowledge work, starting with the 2010 document “A Strategic Approach to Climate Change in
the Philippines,” presented a clear mitigation strategy. The Bank Group’s advisory niche has been
in technically sophisticated strategic products. Its program in this area is relatively large and in
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 45
<<<PDF_PAGE_72>>>
demand. IFC played a catalytic role to develop the market for climate mitigation finance sector in
the Philippines, through regulatory capacity building (sustainable banking network), policy work
(green building code), capacity building advisory and risk-sharing facility to commercial banks,
creating green bond markets, and pioneering the typhoon microinsurance.
The Bank Group’s operational engagement in the sectors most relevant for mitigation—energy,
transport, and waste management—has been uneven. Currently, the Bank Group’s portfolio of
investments in mitigation is dominated by trust-funded projects. Climate mitigation has been the
theme of IFC’s investment program, with more than half of investment commitments during the
review period addressing climate mitigation. In the energy sector, Bank Group lending supports
mitigation through renewable energy development in rural areas, energy efficiency, and carbon
financing. In the transport sector, there were no active projects and only three closed ones in
the period under review. At the same time, mitigation action is needed in transport, including
development of public and nonmotorized transport, urban transportation solutions, and
improved vehicle technologies. Solid waste management has been a long-standing problem,
but the World Bank’s support did not translate into projects. Only one component of a disaster
risk management project deals with solid waste, and only in relation to flooding.
Overall, the Bank Group has followed its mitigation strategy and provided strategic and targeted
lending and ASA support, but on a smaller-than-planned scale and not consistently across sectors;
more could potentially be achieved through closer World Bank–IFC collaboration. Although mitigation
projects have advanced the climate change agenda of the government and the World Bank, many
targets were only partially achieved. The ASA program is achieving its objectives, with the Bank
Group’s program in the energy and transport sectors fully focused on mitigation (renewable energy,
energy efficiency, green transport), and is in demand. IFC’s Sustainable Energy Finance Program
(FY09–15) aimed to catalyze local financial markets for sustainable energy projects in cooperation
with local banks. It resulted in financing of 193 projects ($880 million) by the local banks and helped
avoid 2 million tons of greenhouse gas emissions.
Despite the advanced policy and institutional environment for mitigation and detailed mitigation plans,
implementation has been delayed, and objectives have not been achieved. The only commitment in the
country’s Intended Nationally Determined Contributions submitted to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change—to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 70 percent—is unlikely to be
met because emissions have been steeply rising since 2006. Both the energy and emission intensities
of the economy have been increasing (figure 5.1) with the growing reliance on coal and rising transport
emissions (figure 5.2). It has been estimated that greenhouse gas emissions in the Philippines will triple
between 2010 and 2030 and, if no action is taken, will quadruple by 2050.4
The Bank Group has a comprehensive strategy and program for climate change adaptation
and addressing environmental degradation. In addition to disaster risk management and
resilient infrastructure, it includes protection of ecosystems, agricultural adaptation, climate
adjustment of communities, and water resource management. The Bank Group’s adaptation
and environmental improvement portfolio is relatively large and dominated by loans (unlike
46 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 5
<<<PDF_PAGE_73>>>
120,000 700
600
100,000
500
80,000
400
60,000
300
40,000
200
20,000
100
0 0
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Power consumption (GWh) CO emissions (kt) GDP, 2010 (US$)
2
Energy intensity (kg oil eq. per GDP) Emission intensity (g CO per GDP)
2
mitigation, where the focus is on grant financing and ASA).5 IFC had three investment projects
and three advisory projects.
The World Bank had a considerable ASA engagement on public investment in climate change
adaptation. This was done through the Climate Public Expenditre and Institutional Review (FY13),
accompanied by technical assistance support to the implementation and operationalization of
the National Climate Change Action Plan (FY14). The strategic objective was to assist with the
operationalization of the action plan through the establishment of climate budgeting, which would
support the development of the government’s capacity for more effective planning and implementation
of activities to address climate change. Some early signs of success in this area include adoption of
routine Climate Change Expenditure Tracking and the steady increase in budget allocations.
The government recognizes the importance of climate change adaptation and environmental
improvement, but they have had few tangible results so far. The scale of programs and investments
in these areas are not commensurate with the scale of the problems. The Bank Group contributed—
on a small scale—to the increase in wastewater treatment capacity in Metro Manila, reduction of
pollution in Manila Bay, and improved environmental conditions of Laguna Bay. The Bank Group is
applying new approaches in mainly pilot-level efforts.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 47
noitpmusnoc
rewop
dna
snoissime
OC 2
ytisnetni
noissime
dna
ygrene
,PDG
FIGURE 5.1 | Emission and Energy Intensity of the Philippine Economy
Source: World Bank analysis, World Development Indicators data.
Note: CO = carbon dioxide; GDP = gross domestic product; GWh = gigawatt hour; kt = kiloton.
2
<<<PDF_PAGE_74>>>
FIGURE 5.2 | Electricity Sources in the Philippines
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2000 2005 2010 2015
Non-hydro RE Hydro Gas Coal Oil
Source: World Bank analysis, World Development Indicators data.
Note: RE = renewable energy.
48 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 5
latot
fo
egatnecreP
Conclusions
Table 5.2 summarizes the results and achievements in climate change and environment.
TABLE 5.2 | R esults in Climate Change and Environment
Sector or Area Results World Bank Group Contribution Ratinga
Climate change and Advanced policy and institutional The World Bank Group provided MS (4)
environment environment for mitigation in place, strategic and targeted lending
but greenhouse gas emissions are and Advisory Services and
steeply rising. Adaptation policies Analytics, contributed to several
continued with raising awareness pilots, applying new approaches
and significant investment in and increasing awareness, but
important areas, including reduced on a smaller scale than planned
pollution in Manila Bay and an and not consistently across
improved sewerage system, but sectors. Although the Bank Group
more time and effort are required to concentrated on green action, it
achieve results. could not offset current trends.
Note: a. The Independent Evaluation Group uses a 6-point rating scale, with 1 being the lowest and 6 the highest: HU (1) = highly
unsatisfactory; U (2) = unsatisfactory; MU (3) = moderately unsatisfactory; MS (4) = moderately satisfactory; S (5) = satisfactory; and
HS (6) = highly satisfactory.
<<<PDF_PAGE_75>>>
The achievement of objectives in this area is rated moderately satisfactory, with better results on
climate change adaptation than on mitigation. The focus of the Bank Group’s program for mitigation
was highly relevant to the government’s development priorities, but the program was too small
and not catalytic enough to have a significant impact at the national level. Although the energy
sector program fully supported strategy objectives and was designed to cover areas of strategic
importance, it could not offset continuing investment in coal-based energy. The transport program
could not achieve projected results because of delays in new project approval, and the waste and
coastal pollution program was small relative to needs. Support was provided to a large extent
through small trust-funded projects and technical assistance and advisory services.
The adaptation and environmental improvement program was more effective and highly relevant
to the government’s objectives. Support was consistent with the government’s strategic natural
resource management priorities. The Philippines faces high levels of environmental degradation,
and the World Bank sought to change behaviors and increase awareness through small projects
employing a bottom-up participatory approach—perhaps the most effective modality in these
circumstances. However, even some larger-scale interventions are too small to fundamentally
change the situation. The Bank Group is implementing several community-based projects involving
management of natural resources and agricultural adaptation, applying new approaches, and
increasing awareness of adaptation. Although these are mainly pilot efforts, they could have a
substantial impact if scaled up. They are likely to be sustainable; their sustainability is a government
priority at the strategy and investment levels.
The World Bank could build on the achievements of the program and expand engagement on the
climate change agenda. It could be more selective with mitigation and adaptation projects, while
maintaining focus on awareness building, helping with Intended Nationally Determined Contributions
commitments, supporting efforts to reverse environmental degradation (including expanding
beyond Metro Manila), helping improve capacity at the local level (including climate budgeting and
expenditure planning), and providing technical support with advanced technologies.
Peace and Reconciliation in Mindanao
The Bank Group’s continued engagement in the conflict-affected areas of Mindanao made
important contributions to the peace and reconciliation processes. The engagement signaled that
development work was possible even during the active conflict and negotiation phases. Through
the Mindanao Trust Fund (MTF), the World Bank helped consolidate development assistance for the
socioeconomic recovery of conflict-affected communities in the ARMM and build confidence in the
normalization process with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF). Using the CDD approach, the
World Bank’s program in ARMM helped communities in conflict-affected areas recover from conflict
and improve their living conditions (box 5.1).
The resolution of the protracted and multilayered conflict and violence in Mindanao (characterized
by separatism, communist insurgency, banditry, and rido or clan wars) is at a turning point. After 17
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 49
<<<PDF_PAGE_76>>>
BOX 5.1 | Timeline of Conflict in Muslim Mindanao
1984—Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) is established
1990—Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao is established
2000—All-out war between the Philippine armed forces and the MILF
2003—President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo brokers peace talks with the MILF
2008—Conflict intensifies, peace talks declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court
2011—President Aquino resumes peace negotiations with the MILF in Narita, Japan
2012—Negotiations for Bangsamoro Framework conclude
2014—Bangsamoro Basic Law (BBL) submitted to Congress
2015—Mamasapano incident; passage of the BBL is stalled
2016—Newly elected President Rodrigo Duterte pushes to pass the BBL
2018—President Duterte signs the Bangsamoro Organic Law, formerly the BBL
2019— Plebiscites in Southern Mindanao ratify the Bangsamoro Organic Law and the
establishment of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
Source: Michler and Shively 2014.
years of negotiations, the government of the Philippines and the MILF reached a peace agreement
in 2014 (the Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro). The agreement paved the way for the
normalization process in ARMM through programs tackling security, socioeconomic development,
and confidence-building. The socioeconomic component focused on the rehabilitation,
reconstruction, and development of conflict-affected areas to address the needs of former
combatants, internally displaced persons, and poverty-stricken communities. The peace agreement
led to the Bangsamoro Organic Law, signed by President Duterte in 2018, which established the
new Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (BARMM). The plebiscites on the future
status of ARMM in January and February 2019 provided important legitimacy to the BARMM (see
appendix F for details on the Mindanao conflict).
The signing of the Bangsamoro Organic Law in July 2018 and the January and February 2019
plebiscites provided a clear path for the self-determination of the Bangsamoro. BARMM will have its
own cabinet, legislative assembly, and sharia law (applicable to Muslims only). The region will receive
block grants from the government of the Philippines and shares of the taxes and charges imposed
50 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 5
<<<PDF_PAGE_77>>>
on natural resources in addition to funds to rehabilitate the conflict-affected areas. Approximately
40,000 MILF combatants will be decommissioned and given financial support to transition into
civilian life.
Despite being endowed with fertile agricultural lands and rich natural resources, Mindanao’s
development trails behind the rest of the country. GDP per capita of Mindanao is half that of Luzon,
wages are two-thirds lower than the national average, and nearly a third of households are without
access to power.6 The region is home to 11 of the 20 poorest provinces, with Lanao del Sur province
recording the highest poverty incidence (70.2 percent).7 ARMM, with approximately 4 percent of the
population, contributes only 1 percent to the national GDP and has severe socioeconomic problems,
including a higher death rate and lower life expectancy than the national average (table 5.3).8
TABLE 5.3 | Selected Human Development Indicators of ARMM and the National
Capital Region
Reference
Indicators ARMM NCR Period
Annual average family income ₱139,000 ₱ 425,000 2015
($2,673)a ($8,173)a
Annual average family expenditure ₱111,000 ₱349,000 2015
($2,135)a ($6,712)a
Annual average family saving ₱28,000 ₱76,000 2015
($538)a ($1,462)a
Life expectancy at birth (male) 61.9 68.8 2010–15
Life expectancy at birth (female) 62.9 75.6 2010–15
Functional literacy rate (10–64 y) 72.1 95.3 2013
Source: Philippine Statistics Authority. Quick Stat on Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, National Capital Region (June 2018).
Note: ARMM = Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao; NCR = National Capital Region; ₱ = Philippine peso.
a. US$1= ₱52 (2018).
World Bank Group–Supported Program Focus and Results
Both the CAS 2009–13 and CPS 2014–19 supported peace and stability in the conflict-affected
areas of Mindanao. The World Bank used conflict-sensitive programming and implementation to help
targeted communities in conflict areas get access to social and economic infrastructure and services,
as well as to improve livelihoods. The World Bank’s flagship project, ARMM Social Fund for Peace
and Development, helped improve access to infrastructure and services, food security, employment,
and household incomes; helped strengthen social cohesion and partnerships; and improved local
governance and institutional capacity. Analytical work on Mindanao was relevant and comprehensive.
As with other parts of the World Bank–supported program, peace and reconciliation strategies and
programs had to accommodate a change in administration. The Aquino administration focused on
harnessing Mindanao’s socioeconomic potential, while the current government is looking at “healing”
and addressing “historical injustices.”9 The World Bank’s emphasis remained the same during both
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 51
<<<PDF_PAGE_78>>>
administrations (access to basic services, livelihood improvements, and local capacity building).
However, the approach changed from conflict-sensitive programming to building trust among
communities in conflict-affected areas. This redirected funds to a different set of beneficiaries (from
internally displaced persons to communities in MILF camps) and objectives (from rehabilitation and
conflict-sensitive programming to increasing trust and implementing peace dividend programs) and
created some discontinuity in meeting the objectives.
At the same time, objectives in the CAS and CPS were often formulated as outputs or general
guidelines and did not include baseline data, which made assessment of effectiveness difficult.
World Bank documents report achieving objectives targeting assistance for internally displaced
persons, MILF camps, and the use of conflict-sensitivity tools (during the first half the CPE period),
but evidence is limited. The conflict-sensitivity tool was developed, but there was no indication
either in World Bank documents or during IEG interviews of its effectiveness and use. The 2014
CPS objective of supporting implementation of the “peace dividend,” for example, did not specify
how it was to be measured.10 The World Bank used CDD programs to achieve increased trust, but
strategy papers and project reports do not clearly indicate whether such programs were considered
a peace dividend. Field interviews conducted by IEG provided only anecdotal evidence that CDD
programs increased trust and social cohesion. The objectives on livelihood and basic services were
accomplished for particular MILF camps and not for the entire ARMM.
The multidonor trust fund for reconstruction and development, managed by the World Bank (the
MTF), was key to peace-related activities in ARMM. Established in 2006, the MTF exemplified the
World Bank as convener. It consolidated international development assistance for socioeconomic
recovery of conflict-affected communities in Mindanao and ARMM and sought to build confidence
in the normalization process with the MILF. The MTF supported CDD approaches to improve access
to basic services in conflict-affected communities. According to a 2016 IEG evaluation (World
Bank 2016d), communities in the conflict-affected areas, internally displaced people, and rebel
returnees benefited from visible restoration of some basic services of their choice, sustained by
more accountable local government. The MTF also helped develop the capacity of the Bangsamoro
Development Agency (BDA; the development arm of the MILF). Currently, the World Bank is
providing assistance for the recovery, rehabilitation, and reconstruction efforts in the city of Marawi,
which has been severely affected by the recent most-violent outbreak of conflict in 2017 (box 5.2).
Bank Group–supported programs triggered important changes in ARMM. The programmatic
approach and its interventions in conflict-affected parts of Mindanao helped the MILF and the
government find ways to work together even before signing the peace agreement in 2014. From mid-
2000, World Bank staff worked directly with the combatant parties, particularly the BDA, providing
technical assistance to their efforts. In recent years, the World Bank provided support to the
implementation of the 2014 Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro, with focus on building
legitimate institutions for citizen security, justice, and jobs. The results of the World Bank program
in conflict-affected areas in the Philippines are discussed here in relation to (i) building institutional
capacity, (ii) improving trust and social cohesion, (iii) better access to basic services, and (iv) the
World Bank’s role as a convener among development partners.
52 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 5
<<<PDF_PAGE_79>>>
BOX 5.2 | T he World Bank Group’s Engagement in Postconflict Reconstruction in
Marawi
The five-month siege of Marawi (a city in central Mindanao) in 2017, after clashes
between the Armed Forces of the Philippines and a coalition of violent extremist groups,
had a devastating impact on casualties, displacement, and destruction. A Task Force
Bangon Marawi (TFBM), including members of key government departments, was
established to coordinate humanitarian relief assistance. The government requested
support from the World Bank to coordinate international response and assist the TFBM
in laying out the road map for recovery, reconstruction, and rehabilitation. The World
Bank was asked to provide hands-on and just-in-time technical assistance and advisory
services to the TFBM to carry out the Post-Conflict Needs Assessment, develop the
Comprehensive Rehabilitation and Recovery Program, address postconflict aspects
(for example, complex land issues), create the strategic communication plan, and
provide donor coordination of planning, implementation, and monitoring of the recovery
and rehabilitation efforts. The World Bank provided support for the Comprehensive
Rehabilitation and Recovery Program’s preliminary report and final document and
technical inputs to various TFBM subcommittees. In collaboration with International
Alert, Community and Family Services International, the Philippine Center for Islam and
Democracy, and the Bangsamoro Development Agency, the World Bank conducted 30
focus group discussions to seek feedback for the plan on the most affected area and
finalize the rehabilitation and construction strategy of the city.
Source: World Bank, Independent Evaluation Group mission.
One of the World Bank’s main contributions was supporting the capacity building of the ARMM
administration and the BDA. Established in 2001, the BDA was given a clear mandate to determine,
lead, and manage relief, rehabilitation, and development projects in the conflict-affected areas. The
BDA evolved from a small group of volunteers with no development experience to a development
agency implementing projects in the region. Hundreds of people were trained and equipped with
organizational, planning, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation skills. At some point, the
BDA had 300 staff across seven regional offices, with its headquarters in Cotabato City. Through the
MTF, the World Bank and other development partners provided technical and financial assistance
to the BDA to prepare it for a role in BARMM in the transition period. The MTF funded technical
assistance to help the BDA formulate the Bangsamoro Development Plan, the first comprehensive
economic development blueprint prepared by a nonstate armed group. The World Bank also
provided assistance to the ARMM administration on procurement, management, and monitoring
of infrastructure projects, and to regional and local authorities on institutional strengthening and
development of administrative guidelines.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 53
<<<PDF_PAGE_80>>>
World Bank–supported programs contributed to peace building by improving social cohesion
among different groups and working with different parties to the conflict. The CDD approach
allowed different stakeholders and combatant parties to collaborate to deliver community projects.
Local stakeholders jointly decide the type of intervention and, with the help of the BDA, design and
implement the project. The participative approach (which included indigenous peoples and women,
who are often marginalized from decision-making processes) fostered social unity and built trust,
while increased familiarity led to mutual understanding.
World Bank programs improved access to basic services in ARMM. The ARMM Social Fund
provided grants for CDD projects to build, rehabilitate, and improve small-scale social and economic
infrastructure, such as water and sanitation systems, small-scale irrigation schemes, health centers,
schools, and postharvest facilities. Larger regional infrastructure damaged during the conflict were
also rehabilitated, including health and education facilities, social services, and ports. There were
1 million direct beneficiaries under the ARMM Social Fund Project. According to a survey conducted
by the project, 86 percent of women were satisfied that the project’s investments aligned with their
needs. CDD interventions under the MTF enhanced the living conditions of war-torn communities by
enabling them to get access to improved infrastructure, including water systems, barangay roads,
solar driers, and community centers.
The World Bank’s reputation for neutrality and its global experience in situations of conflict helped
it to play a convening role among development partners, and to be a trusted partner with other
entities in Mindanao. Jointly with the United Nations Development Programme, the World Bank
BOX 5.3 | The Bangsamoro Conflict Monitoring System
The Bangsamoro Conflict Monitoring System (BCMS) is a subnational conflict database
established by the International Alert U.K. Philippines Office in partnership and with
funding from the Bank Group, Australian Aid, and the Korea Trust Fund. The BCMS
aims to systematically monitor and analyze violent conflict within the Bangsamoro and
adjoining areas to inform policy, development, and peace-building approaches and
strategies. The BCMS works with three academic institutions and relies on several data
sources that include the Philippine National Police and media reports focusing on the five
provinces in ARMM. Between 2011 and 2017, 14,873 incidents were reported in ARMM.
It is the biggest database in the world for a subregion. The report War and Identity
produced by International Alert in 2018 claims that the shadow economy was the leading
cause for the overall crimes and violence between 2011 and 2017, accounting for one-
third of the incidents. The second major cause of conflict was related to identity issues,
while common crimes came in third (21 percent) and political issues fourth (13 percent).
Source: International Alert 2018.
54 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 5
<<<PDF_PAGE_81>>>
set up the Facility for Advisory Support for Transition Capacities in 2013 to provide technical and
financial assistance to the MILF and the government for the transition process to Bangsamoro;
it included expertise for negotiations and drafting legislation. The World Bank partnered with
International Alert to set up the Bangsamoro Conflict Monitoring System, a subnational database
to collect and analyze violent conflicts in Bangsamoro and a reliable information source for policy
makers and stakeholders engaged in the Mindanao peace process (box 5.3). According to field
interviews, the World Bank could further improve collaboration with one of the leading multinational
partners, including in support of the Marawi reconstruction. Improved collaboration and quality
of dialogue in this high-profile initiative will send positive signals within the development partner
community in the Philippines.
Conclusions
Table 5.4 summarizes the results and achievements in peace and reconciliation in Mindanao.
The achievement of objectives related to peace and reconciliation in Mindanao is rated satisfactory.
Despite persistent challenges, the Bank Group’s efforts in Mindanao and ARMM provided important
contributions to the peace and reconciliation process. Targeted communities received the benefits
of peace and development assistance, and key stakeholders and donors stressed the critical
role of the World Bank in the peace process and capacity building. The World Bank has been an
effective manager of consolidated international development assistance through the MTF and has
been able to keep the MTF functional even during times of high tension in ARMM. The involvement
of communities and LGUs in projects has fostered social cohesion and increased trust between
Muslims and Christians. CDD projects helped improve access to basic services and contributed
to social cohesion. Surveys for the MTF Implementation Completion and Results report show that
86 percent of the beneficiaries admitted that projects reflected their needs. More than a third of
recipients acknowledged that CDD programs improved their living conditions and that the new
infrastructure (barangay roads, solar driers) contributed directly or indirectly to their economic and
social well-being. Many community centers were used for implementing the Alternative Learning
System, a national program providing basic education in poor urban and rural areas. Approximately
2,800 people—former combatants, housewives, and out-of-school youth—attended Alternative
Learning System classes in ARMM. The CDD interventions helped build capacity within the BDA,
particularly in project design and implementation.
The sustainability of World Bank–supported interventions in Mindanao differed. Small-scale
infrastructure interventions (such as barangay roads, water systems, solar driers) appear to be
more sustainable than livelihood interventions. Community participation contributed to ownership
and made people responsible for managing the facilities. However, various livelihood projects (for
example, production of clothes and banana chips) were less sustainable because of the lack of
markets. Despite continued efforts to build capacity in the BDA, risks to institutional sustainability are
high. The main factors are the interim nature of the BDA, lack of clarity about its future in BARMM,
frequent staff turnover, and high dependence on MTF funds.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 55
<<<PDF_PAGE_82>>>
TABLE 5.4 | R esults in Peace and Reconciliation in Mindanao
World Bank Group
Sector or Area Main Results Contribution Ratingsa
Increased access Peace agreements Community-driven
to basic services with the MILF signed development projects
in conflict-affected (2012 and 2014), (water, transport, and social
areas implementation infrastructure) provided S (5)
of socioeconomic better access to services
development programs and improved livelihoods for
initiated. 638,000 people.
Increased trust Normalization process The collaborative and
and social launched: the MILF participatory approach
cohesion and the government of the World Bank–
embarked on applying supported programs helped
the provisions of communities increase trust
peace agreements. and enabled communities
S (5)
Improved community and local government units
participation in to work together. Fifty-
investment planning in one percent of project
conflict-affected areas. beneficiaries were women.
Indigenous peoples benefited
from projects.
Governance The Bangsamoro The World Bank provided
capacity building Development Agency capacity building to
in conflict-affected developed into a Bangsamoro Development
areas functional organization, Agency on project
but institutional design, development,
weaknesses persist implementation, and MS (4)
and its future role monitoring, helping position
in Bangsamoro the agency as a reliable
Autonomous Region partner in Mindanao.
of Muslim Mindanao is
unclear.
Partnerships MTF was an effective World Bank leadership and S (5)
multidonor mechanism global expertise contributed
of development to MTF success.
assistance.
Overall rating S (5)
Note: LGU = local government unit; MILF = Moro Islamic Liberation Front; MTF = Mindanao Trust Fund.
a. The Independent Evaluation Group uses a 6-point rating scale, with 1 being the lowest and 6 the highest: HU (1) = highly
unsatisfactory; U (2) = unsatisfactory; MU (3) = moderately unsatisfactory; MS (4) = moderately satisfactory; S (5) = satisfactory; and
HS (6) = highly satisfactory.
The impact of the World Bank’s analytic work on operations and the government’s strategies
remains to be seen. For example, the Mindanao Jobs Report, which recommends how to address
land dispossessions and conflict, has not had much traction to date, and its recommendations
have not been applied. Some stakeholders believe it is not the right time yet for some of the analytic
products, but that they could be useful during the transition period.
56 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 5
<<<PDF_PAGE_83>>>
The World Bank’s track record in Mindanao could open new avenues for engagement in the newly
established BARMM. The need for a strong and active Bank Group engagement in BARMM (including
establishing a more permanent local presence, using the ongoing work on Marawi rehabilitation
as a possible entry point) is more urgent during the transition period. The World Bank should
adjust strategies, approaches, and priorities as the situation evolves from a conflict to postconflict
environment, building on MTF results and experience. In this context, continued close engagement
and dialogue are important for identifying new opportunities. BARMM institutions will need to improve
capacity in development planning, budgeting, financial management, and taxation to be able to handle
government and donor funds (such as the Bangsamoro Normalization Trust Fund).11
1 h ttps://www.gfdrr.org/en/philippines.
2 A s of September 2019, the proposed bill to create the Department of Resilience has not yet been approved by the Parliament.
3 The Philippines ratified the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change treaty in 1994, chaired the
Group of 77 (developing nations) at the first Conference of the Parties (COP1) in Berlin in 1995, and ratified the Kyoto
Protocol in 2003.
4 Philippines Policy Development Support for Low-Carbon Development. A World Bank technical assistance project.
Concept Note. 2018.
5 In the period under review, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) portfolio had nine
adaptation projects (currently some are still active) with total financing of $1.560 billion, which includes IBRD financing
of $1.036 billion and trust fund financing of $32 million. The IBRD Advisory Services and Analytics portfolio had
nine products, mainly providing knowledge support to lending projects. Adaptation and environment projects
(or components) can be classified into three categories: (i) community-based management of natural resources
combining objectives of poverty reduction, rural development, sustainability of agriculture resources, and adaptation;
(ii) participatory environmental management; and (iii) improved sewerage and wastewater services.
6 National Electrification Administration, January 2018. http://www.nea.gov.ph/ao39.
7 2015 Philippine Statistical Yearbook. https://psa.gov.ph/products-and-services/publications/philippine-statistical-
yearbook/2015.
8 P hilippine Statistics Authority. “Quick Stat on Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao, National Capital Region–June 2018”.
https://psa.gov.ph/statistics/quickstat/regional-quickstat/2018/Autonomous%20Region%20in%20Muslim%20Mindanao.
9 Philippine Development Plan 2017–2022.
10 The 2017 Performance and Learning Review dropped the “peace dividend” objective.
11 The government has allocated ₱31.1 billion (approximately $600 million) for 2019 for the new Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 57
<<<PDF_PAGE_84>>>
6
THE PERIOD UNDER REVIEW SAW strong economic
performance in the Philippines. Growth has been sustained at
higher levels than before, and poverty has been reduced. Strong
global demand resulted in growing remittances and income
Conclusions
from a booming services sector. The Philippines is on track to
and Recom-
achieve UMIC status in the near future. These achievements are
mendations
impressive in the context of recurring severe natural disasters and
conflict in Mindanao.
However, higher growth has not resolved many fundamental
structural problems. The Philippines still has one of the world’s
highest rates of inequality, and productivity in agriculture and
manufacturing lags most regional competitors. Despite some
improvements in human development, serious gaps remain
in family planning, nutrition, maternal mortality, and education
quality. Infrastructure, particularly in transport and municipal
services, is inadequate to meet the needs of the rapidly growing
and urbanizing population.
The main constraints facing the country are well understood by
the government and development community; debate revolves
less around what needs to be done than how to do it. For
development partners, the political economy presents a complex
set of challenges in determining how best to provide support. The
electoral cycle can bring abrupt swings in government policy. The
World Bank, along with other development partners, faces the
challenge of ensuring continued strong client engagement despite
changes in administrations and counterparts. In addition, political
elites often block reforms that could affect their position, such as
those supporting a more competitive business environment and
increased decentralization.
Over the past decade, the Bank Group made a substantial
contribution to improved economic performance in the Philippines.
The Bank Group’s program covered areas highly relevant to the
country’s development priorities and commensurate with its
comparative advantages. At the same time, more could have been
done in some specific areas, such as governance, private sector
development, and subnational engagement, building on the legacy
58 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 6
<<<PDF_PAGE_85>>>
of the ongoing long-term partnerships. The impact of the World Bank was significant in strengthening
macroeconomic management, governance, social protection, and disaster risk management;
contributing to peace and reconciliation in Mindanao, upgrading rural infrastructure; and improving
access to services for the poor. However, the World Bank’s support was less successful in promoting
private sector development (particularly for SMEs), financial inclusion, climate change mitigation
measures, and enhancing the capacity of subnational governments.
The World Bank’s contribution was driven by a set of well-established long-running interventions,
which can be described as “development platforms,” most of which were put in place before the
period under review. These included the DPL series, support through the SWDRP for the 4Ps (CCT)
program, the Kalahi-CIDDS (CDD) program, MRDP, and the subsequent (2014) nationwide PRDP.
These platforms were supported by a substantial program of ASA that provided the diagnostics and
evidence base needed for the implementation of these programs. These programs remain at the
core of the World Bank’s support for the Philippines and can be used as multisector development
platforms and launching pads for support in other sectors and at the subnational level.
Taken together, these platforms and the ASA reinforced one another and enhanced the World Bank’s
effectiveness. For disaster risk management, the World Bank’s analytic work contributed to the new
policy framework, a DPL (with CAT DDO) provided quickly available funds when disaster occurred,
the 4Ps uses family development sessions to instruct the rural poor on how to protect against
and respond to disasters, and the Kalahi-CIDDS and PRDP have introduced higher standards of
resilience to the construction of local infrastructure. In the area of governance, the success of the
DPL series in supporting timelier and more transparent budget reporting has been complemented
by the support for community empowerment through the Kalahi-CIDSS program and participatory
planning and better provincial and municipal management in the PRDP. The use of targeted and
monitored transfers under the CCT program has meant that funds reach the beneficiaries, in contrast
to past social transfer programs where only a small fraction of funds (as little as 10 percent in one
program) reached the beneficiaries.
The dilemma for the World Bank is that these long-running programs, although in line with the
objectives of the previous two administrations, may be less central to the objectives of the current
administration. The central theme of the administration of President Duterte is addressing the huge
gap in national-level infrastructure. There is no question of the importance of this for enhancing the
Philippines’ competitiveness and improving the quality of life in Metro Manila and beyond. But other
development partners are better placed to support this agenda; the government sees them as less
costly sources of funding, and these partners have been more active in this area in the past.
Although the World Bank has global expertise of relevance to the government, it is currently
underused in the Philippines. The areas in which the Bank Group could do more with its
comparative advantage include disaster risk management and climate change; support for the
peace process in Mindanao; enhancing the capacity of subnational governments to provide
better services, nutrition, and education quality; supporting private sector development and SME
development; and good governance.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 59
<<<PDF_PAGE_86>>>
In most middle-income countries, the World Bank’s knowledge services are central to its
comparative advantage; this is also the case in the Philippines. Currently, however, there appears
to be less interest in the World Bank’s knowledge contribution in some areas. Many stakeholders
interviewed by IEG felt that the World Bank focuses too much on basic diagnostics, whereas the
government is looking for additional support with implementation. Although the decision to take
a programmatic approach to ASA was appropriate, the scale of the World Bank’s ASA program
may have exceeded both the appetite and absorptive capacity of its counterparts, resulting in the
impression that at least some analysis and technical support was of limited value. It will be important
for the World Bank to work more closely with the authorities to identify areas of ASA (including joint
work and increased use of local expertise) that are of more direct interest to the government.
The World Bank played an important convening function in many areas. For example, it made a major
contribution to a gradual development of broad interagency consensus regarding the longer-term PFM
action plan. Successful multisector operations (such as SWDRP, PRDP, and KC-NCDD) linked several
departments to meet their objectives. The World Bank provided the necessary long-term commitment
and oversight to maintain these links and helped successive administrations keep them in place.
There is alignment between the World Bank’s comparative advantage and the government’s goal
for the country to achieve UMIC status by the end of the current administration. Reaching UMIC
status is feasible if the country continues to grow rapidly, but it is necessary to look at more than
just the growth numbers. Rapid growth has contributed to greater poverty reduction, but the
Philippines still has some fundamental structural issues that need to be addressed. These include a
high rate of inequality; still-high levels of poverty and vulnerability, which leads many of the nonpoor
to periodically fall back into poverty; a dependence on the service sector; underperformance of
the agriculture and manufacturing sectors; lack of medium-size enterprises (the “missing middle”);
inadequate quality of education, which limits the access of the poor to better jobs; and gaps in the
health care system. The capture of the political system by a dominant elite is both a cause of many
of these problems and a constraint in addressing them. The alignment of this agenda with the World
Bank’s comparative advantage should provide the basis for an agreement on how best the World
Bank can support the government’s objectives. The World Bank’s support program in the upcoming
Country Partnership Framework should be presented in this context.
In the face of many constraints, the positive outcomes over a sustained period of the World Bank–
supported program represent a significant achievement, and there is scope for the World Bank to
have a greater impact. With this in mind, the following recommendations are suggested:
Consider revising and updating the large, long-running programs: the DPL series, CCT
program, rural development, and CDD projects. These well-established and successful
programs remain at the core of the World Bank’s support for the Philippines. Although their
continued relevance is not in question, some of the innovation and experimentation that
characterized their initial phases has been reduced and needs to be revived. There are risks that
some of these programs could lose relevance unless there is a reassessment of how they relate
to evolving realities and the government’s priorities.
60 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | Chapter 6
<<<PDF_PAGE_87>>>
Apply current successful models of subnational engagement (such as the PRDP) to expand
presence and operations at the provincial and municipal levels and build the capacity
of subnational governments. There are many operating difficulties at the local level in the
Philippines: elite capture in many provinces and municipalities, the proliferation of small
jurisdictions with limited administrative and technical capacity, and the national government’s
apparent lack of appetite for addressing these issues. The World Bank has been able to get
traction in this area through the PRDP and social protection and CDD programs. PRDP has
contributed to capacity building at the subnational level and created a transparent governance
model through partnership with the Department of Agriculture, with its network of local branches.
The World Bank should build on these successes and possibly focus on some of the disaster hot
spots for piloting a new model of engagement at the subnational level.
Improve the overall balance of analytical and advisory engagement: make it more demand-
driven and selective, with greater emphasis on collaborative approaches. There is clear
appetite for expanded use of Bank Group ASA for implementation support as opposed to broad
sector diagnostics. This has the potential to strengthen partnerships and improve dialogue with
government agencies. In some sectors, the Bank Group could make a more systematic effort to
use local expertise (academia, think tanks) as partners in delivery of ASA, thereby contributing to
enhancing local analytical capacity.
Consider making Mindanao (and especially BARMM) a focal area for Bank Group support,
and potentially a model for in-depth regional engagement and local capacity building.
Mindanao has the largest concentration of poor in the Philippines and has considerable
economic potential. Here is where the World Bank has a comparative advantage, given continued
engagement on peace and reconciliation, experience with MRDP, capacity building at the BDA,
ongoing Marawi reconstruction, and high-quality analytical work, such as the Mindanao Jobs
Report. Mindanao could be a showcase of effective development assistance in a specific region,
which can be scaled up to other regions.
Improve coordination and sequencing of World Bank and IFC interventions for private sector
development and operationalize the “One Bank” approach. World Bank–IFC cooperation
should be complementary (while avoiding conflicts of interest) and should extend beyond
the exchange of information to a more strategic partnership. Successful experience from
other countries suggests that the use of common task leadership for IFC or World Bank
projects has helped develop a unified Bank Group culture in certain areas. A good example of
cooperation was the integrated effort to promote agribusiness investments in Mindanao. MIGA
reengagement could add value by promoting foreign investment in the country, especially in
Mindanao, a large, populous island with considerable economic potential. The Bank Group
could consider working with the Philippine authorities to develop an explicit private sector
development strategy, including advisory support to help deal with elite capture and the impact
of new technologies on growth, and to more effectively mobilize the country’s large youth
population.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 61
<<<PDF_PAGE_88>>>
references
Aceron, Joy. 2017. Independent Reporting Mechanism (IRM) for Open Government Partnership—Philippines
End-of-Term Report, 2015–2017. Washington, DC: Open Government Partnership.
ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2018. Philippines: Country Strategy Partnership (2018–2023). Manila: ADB.
https://www.adb.org/documents/philippines-country-partnership-strategy-2018-2023.
———. 2017a. Country Operations Business Plan Philippines 2018–2020. Manila: ADB. https://www.adb.org/
documents/philippines-country-operations-business-plan-2018-2020.
———. 2017b. Philippines: Country Partnership Strategy. Final Review Validation, 2011–2016. Manila: ADB.
———. 2015. 2015 Guidelines for the Preparation of Country Assistance Program Evaluations and Country
Partnership Strategy Final Review Validations. Manila: ADB. https://www.adb.org/documents/
guidelines-preparation-country-assistance-program-evaluation-reports.
———. 2011. Country Partnership Strategy Philippines 2011–2016. Manila: ADB. https://www.adb.org/
documents/philippines-country-partnership-strategy-2011-2016.
———. 2009. Poverty in the Philippines: Causes, Constraints, and Opportunities. Manila: ADB. https://www.adb.
org/sites/default/files/publication/27529/poverty-philippines-causes-constraints-opportunities.pdf.
———. 2008. Country Assistance Program Evaluations for the Philippines: Increasing Strategic
Focus for Better Results (2008). Manila: ADB. https://www.adb.org/documents/
country-assistance-program-evaluation-philippines-increasing-strategic-focus-better.
Australia, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. 2014. Annual Report 2013–14. Barton, Australia: Department
of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
Ballesteros, Marife M., and Jasmine V. Egana. 2013. “Efficiency and Effectiveness Review of the National
Housing Authority (NHA) Resettlement Program.” PIDS Discussion Paper Series 2013–28, Philippine
Institute for Development Studies (PIDS), Quezon City, the Philippines.
Benson, Charlotte. 2009. Mainstreaming Disaster Risk Reduction into Development: Challenges and Experience
in the Philippines. Geneva: ProVention Consortium.
Buendia, Rizal G. 2006. “Mindanao Conflict in the Philippines: Ethno-Religious War or Economic Conflict?” In
The Politics of Death: Political Violence in Southeast Asia, edited by Aurel Croissant, Beate Martin, and
Sascha Kneip, 147–87. Berlin: Southeast Asia Modernities.
Chua, Karl Kendrick, Nataliya Mylenko, Nazmul Chaudhury, Carolina Figueroa-Geron, Motoky Hayakawa, and
Moira Enerva. 2013. Philippine Development Report: Creating More and Better Jobs. Washington, DC:
World Bank.
Credit Suisse Research Institute. 2018. Global Wealth Report. Zürich: Credit Suisse. https://www.credit-suisse.
com/corporate/en/research/research-institute/global-wealth-report.html.
Crost, Benjamin, Joseph H. Felter, and Patrick B. Johnston. 2016. “Conditional Cash Transfers, Civil Conflict and
Insurgent Influence: Experimental Evidence from the Philippines.” Journal of Development Economics 118:
171–82.
Economist. 2017. “Fruit and Ruts: The Philippines Has the Most Persistent Poverty in South-East Asia.” The
Economist, November 25.
Felipe, Jesus. 2012. “Tracking the Middle-Income Trap: What Is It, Who Is in It, and Why? Part I.” Economics
Working Paper Series 306, Asian Development Bank, Manila, the Philippines.
62 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | References
<<<PDF_PAGE_89>>>
Felipe, Jesus, and Gemma Estrada. 2018. “Why Has the Philippines’ Growth Performance Improved? From
Disappointment to Promising Success.” ADB Economics Working Paper 542, Asian Development Bank,
Manila, the Philippines.
Garrett, Geoffrey. 2004. “Globalization’s Missing Middle.” Foreign Affairs 83 (6): 84–96.
German Watch. 2013. Global Climate Risk Index. Bonn: German Watch.
Habito, Cielito F. 2010. An Agenda for High and Inclusive Growth in the Philippines. Manila: Asian Development
Bank.
———. 2012. “Economic Growth for All.” Philippine Daily Inquirer, June 25.
Haydarov, Aziz. 2011. Philippines: Private Sector Development Challenges and Possible Ways to Go. Manila:
Asian Development Bank.
IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2014. Philippines: Selected Issues. Country Report 14/246, Washington, DC:
International Monetary Fund.
———. 2016. ASEAN-5 Cluster Report: Evolution of Monetary Policy Framework. Country Report 16/176,
Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
———. 2017. Philippines Article IV Consultation—Staff Report. Country Report 17/334, Washington, DC:
International Monetary Fund.
———. 2018. Philippines 2018 Article IV Consultation. IMF Country Report 18/287, Washington, DC: International
Monetary Fund.
International Alert. 2018. War and Identity. London: International Alert.
International Budget Partnership. 2017. Open Budget Index Score 2017—Philippines. Washington, DC:
International Budget Partnership.
Matsuda, Yasuhiko. 2011. “Ripe for a Big Bang? Assessing the Political Feasibility of Legislative Reforms in the
Philippines’ Local Government Code.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 5792, World Bank,
Washington, DC.
Michler, Jeffrey D., and Gerald E. Shively. 2014. “Land Tenure, Tenure Security and Farm Efficiency: Panel
Evidence from the Philippines.” Journal of Agricultural Economics 66 (1): 155–169.
MMDA (Metropolitan Manila Development Authority) and the World Bank. 2014. The Metro Manila Greenprint
2030: Building a Vision. Manila: MMDA.
Philippines, Bangko Sentral ng Pilippinas. 2017. National Baseline Survey on Financial Inclusion. Manila: Bangko
Sentral ng Pilippinas.
———. 2018. Report on Economic and Financial Developments. Manila: Bangko Sentral ng Pilippinas.
Philippines, Bureau of Trade and Policy Research. 2018. Philippine National Accounts 2015–18. Manila: Bureau of
Trade and Policy Research.
Philippines, Department of Public Works and Highways. 2017. Brief History of National Roads in the Philippines.
Manila: Department of Public Works and Highways.
Philippines, Development Budget Coordination Committee. 2019. Fiscal Risks Statements. 2012–2019. Manila:
Development Budget Coordination Committee.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 63
<<<PDF_PAGE_90>>>
Philippines, Government Commission for Government-Controlled Corporations. 2016. Annual Report. Manila:
Government Commission for Government-Controlled Corporations.
Philippines, National Economic Development Authority. 2011. Philippine Development Plan 2011–2016. Manila:
National Economic Development Authority.
———. 2017. Philippine Development Plan 2017–2022. Manila: National Economic Development Authority.
Philippines, Philippines Statistics Authority. 2011–18. Agricultural Indicators System Output and Productivity.
Manila: Philippines Statistics Authority.
———. 2015. Family Income and Expenditure Survey. Manila: Philippines Statistics Authority.
Philippines, Senate Economic Planning Office. 2018. Economic Report. Senate Economic Planning Office,
Manila.
Rosellon, Maureen Anne D., and Josef T. Yap. 2010. “The Role of the Private Sector in Regional Economic
Integration: A View from the Philippines.” PIDS Discussion Paper Series, 2010–23, Philippine Institute for
Development Studies (PIDS), Quezon City, the Philippines.
Schiavo-Campo, Salvatore, and Mary Judd. 2005. “The Mindanao Conflict in the Philippines—Roots, Costs, and
Potential Peace Dividend”. Social Development Papers, Conflict Prevention and Reconstruction Paper 24/
February, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Teehankee, Julio C. 2016. “The Philippines in 2015: The Calm before the Political Storm.” Philippine Political
Science Journal 37 (3): 228–238. doi.org/10.1080/01154451.2016.1259144.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2018. Human Development Indicators. Country Indicators
Philippines. 2018 Statistical Update. http://hdr.undp.org/en/countries/profiles/PHL
U.S. Department of State. 2017. Investment Climate Statements. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of State.
WEF (World Economic Forum). 2018. Global Gender Gap Report. Geneva, Switzerland: WEF. http://www3.
weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2018.pdf.
World Bank. 2009a. Philippines—Country Assistance Strategy for FY10–FY12. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2009b. Philippines—Country Environmental Analysis. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2009c. Philippines—Third Rural Finance Project. Independent Evaluation Group, Project Performance
Assessment Report 48671, Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2009d. Philippines—Water District Development Project. Independent Evaluation Group, Project
Performance Assessment Report 44507. Washington, DC: World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/
curated/en/324161468295522681/pdf/445070PPAR0P001IC0disclosed08131091.pdf.
———. 2010. The World Bank Group’s Response to the Global Economic Crisis: Phase One. Independent
Evaluation Group. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2011a. Growth and Productivity in Agriculture and Agribusiness: Evaluative Lessons from World Bank
Group Experience. Independent Evaluation Group. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2011b. The Philippines—Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2011c. “Challenges and Options for 2010 and Beyond.” Philippines Discussion Notes 55655–PH, World
Bank, Washington, DC.
64 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | References
<<<PDF_PAGE_91>>>
———. 2011d. The Philippines—Nutrition at a Glance. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2011e. Philippines—Typhoons Ondoy and Pepeng: Post-Disaster Needs Assessment. Washington, DC:
World Bank.
———. 2011f. “The Health and Education Sectors in the Philippines.” Political Economy Impact Stories 3, World
Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2011g. Social Safety Nets: An Evaluation of World Bank Support, 2000–2010. Independent Evaluation
Group. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2011h. Strengthening Public Finance for More Inclusive Growth. Philippines Public Expenditure Review.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2012a. An Evaluation of the 2007 Strategy and Implementation Plan. World Bank Country-Level
Engagement on Governance and Anticorruption: Desk Review Data for Country Programs and Projects.
Independent Evaluation Group. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2012b. Inclusive Green Growth—The Pathway to Sustainable Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2012c. The World Bank Group’s Response to the Global Economic Crisis Phase 2. Independent
Evaluation Group. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2012d. Youth Employment Programs: An Evaluation of World Bank and International Finance Corporation
Support. Independent Evaluation Group. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2013a. Philippines Conditional Cash Transfer Program: Impact Evaluation 2012. Washington, DC: World
Bank.
———. 2013b. Philippines-Improved Access to Water Services in the East Zone of Metro Manila Project.
Washington, DC: World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/142571468294667430/
Philippines-Improved-Access-to-Water-Services-in-the-East-Zone-of-Metro-Manila-Project.
———. 2013c. The World Bank Group and the Global Food Crisis: An Evaluation of the World Bank Group
Response. Independent Evaluation Group. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2014a. The Philippines—Country Partnership Strategy Completion Report Review for FY10–FY13.
Independent Evaluation Group. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2014b. Past and Future: Bank–IFC Cooperation at the Country Strategy Level. Independent Evaluation
Group. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2014c. The Philippines—Country Assistance Strategy Progress Report. Independent Evaluation Group.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2014d. Philippines—Country Partnership Strategy for FY15–18. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2015a. City Strength Diagnostic: Methodological Guidebook. Washington, DC: World Bank. https://
openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/22470.
———. 2015b. Investment Climate Reforms: An Independent Evaluation of World Bank Group Support to Reforms
of Business Regulations. Independent Evaluation Group. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2015c. The Poverty Focus of Country Programs: Lessons from World Bank Experience. Independent
Evaluation Group. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 65
<<<PDF_PAGE_92>>>
———. 2015d. World Bank Annual Report 2015. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2015e. World Bank Group Support to Public-Private Partnerships: Lessons from Experience in Client
Countries, FY02–12. Independent Evaluation Group. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2016a. Financial Viability of the Electricity Sector in Developing Countries: Recent Trends and
Effectiveness of World Bank Interventions. Independent Evaluation Group. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2016b. Industry Competitiveness and Jobs. An Evaluation of World Bank Group Industry-Specific
Support to Promote Industry Competitiveness and Its Implications for Jobs. Independent Evaluation Group.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2016c. World Bank Group Climate Action Plan 2016–2020. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2016d. World Bank Group Engagement in Situations of Fragility, Conflict, and Violence. Independent
Evaluation Group. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2016e. World Bank Group Support for Housing Finance: An IEG Learning Product. Independent
Evaluation Group. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
———. 2017a. Improving Basic Health: The World Bank’s Experience in the Philippines. Independent Evaluation
Group, Project Performance Assessment Report 114021. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2017b. Mobile Metropolises: Urban Transport Matters: An IEG Evaluation of the World Bank Group’s
Support for Urban Transport. Independent Evaluation Group. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2017c. The Philippines—Disaster Risk Management Development Policy Loan with a Catastrophe
Deferred Drawdown Option. Independent Evaluation Group, Project Performance Assessment Report
114746. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2017d. The Philippines—Performance and Learning Review of the Country Partnership Strategy for FY15–
FY19. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2017e. The Philippines—Urbanization Review: Fostering Competitive, Sustainable and Inclusive Cities.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2017f. World Bank Group Engagement in Upper-Middle-Income Countries: Evidence from IEG Evaluations.
IEG Synthesis Report. Independent Evaluation Group. Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2018a. Australia–World Bank Philippines Development Trust Fund: A Decade of Partnership (2009–2018).
Washington, DC: World Bank. https://dfat.gov.au/about-us/publications/Pages/australia-world-bank-
philippines-development-trust-fund-evaluation-report.aspx.
———. 2018b. “Higher Productivity is Key to Prosperous Philippines.” Press Release, September 24.
———. 2018c. Making Growth Work for the Poor: A Poverty Assessment for the Philippines. Washington, DC:
World Bank.
———. 2018d. Philippines Economic Update: Investing in the Future. Washington, DC: World Bank. https://www.
worldbank.org/en/country/philippines/publication/philippines-economic-update-investing-in-the-future.
———. 2018e. Philippines Economic Update: Staying the Course amid Global Uncertainty. Washington, DC:
World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/30564.
———. 2018f. Support for Basic Education Reform 2006–12. Independent Evaluation Group, Project Performance
Assessment Report 117900. Washington, DC: World Bank.
66 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | References
<<<PDF_PAGE_93>>>
———. 2019a. Creating Markets to Leverage the Private Sector for Sustainable Development and Growth. An
Evaluation of the World Bank Group’s Experience Through 16 Case Studies. Independent Evaluation Group.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
———. 2019b. Doing Business 2019: Training for Reform. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Independent Evaluation Group | World Bank Group 67
<<<PDF_PAGE_94>>>
68 The World Bank Group Partnership with the Philippines | References
<<<PDF_PAGE_95>>>
APPENDIXES
The World Bank Group Partnership
with the Philippines, 2009–18
Country Program Evaluation
<<<PDF_PAGE_96>>>

<<<PDF_PAGE_97>>>
Appendix A. Country Program Evaluation
Outcome Ratings
Key World Bank Group
Engagement Area Main Results Contributions Ratinga
1. Macroeconomic Management and Governance MS (4)
(i) Macroeconomic Significant and The DPL series (2011–15) and technical S (5)
management and sustained gains in assistance helped improve
revenue mobilization macroeconomic macroeconomic management,
performance. implementing the “sin tax” law, and
Improved revenue raising investors' confidence.
performance.
(ii) Expenditure Expansion of public DPLs supported expansion in S (5)
rationalization spending, increase in infrastructure and CCT spending. ASA
the share of priority helped raise spending efficiency and
and pro-poor public provided effective support for
spending, procurement reform.
improvement in
budget planning, and
public procurement.
(iii) Transparency Progress in The World Bank Group supported MS (4)
and accountability in strengthening reforms to enhance fiscal transparency
the public sector governance since and good governance and played an
2010. Improved Public essential role in strengthening public
Expenditure and demand for government accountability.
Financial More could have been done in recent
Accountability scores. years.
However, no progress
reported after 2015.
Several key reforms
remain incomplete.
(iv) Decentralization Progress in The Bank Group helped design and MU (3)
and local introducing new implement several local governance
government policies to promote programs. Not able to develop effective
strengthening local government partnerships at the subnational level or
transparency and provide a sufficient contribution to
accountability. strengthening local government
However, no capabilities.
improvement in the
regulatory framework
for decentralization.
Limited progress on
strengthening local
government capacity.
71
<<<PDF_PAGE_98>>>
Appendix A
Country Program Evaluation Outcome Ratings
Key World Bank Group
Engagement Area Main Results Contributions Ratinga
2. Private Sector–Led Growth MU (3)
(i) Improved Some progress on The Bank Group provided assistance on MU (3)
investment climate regulatory policy policy development. Results on
framework and investment climate and business
institutional capacity regulations limited.
for business
registration. Progress
on streamlining
business processes in
selected LGUs.
National-level
indicators stagnant or
deteriorating.
(ii) Increased access Increased lending IFC client banks benefited from advisory MS (4)
to financial services volumes to small and services and increased lending volumes
medium enterprises and products. IFC gender finance
Financial inclusion of program with RCBC allowed the
the poor still very institution to lend more than
limited. No progress $120 million to more than 2,000
in agrifinance and women-owned SMEs. IFC supported
securing credit first private indexed crop insurance
through movable product. Support for credit information
assets. Credit system not successful.
information system
not in place.
(iii) Increased Significant increase in World Bank projects provided effective S (5)
agricultural household incomes, platform for participatory rural
productivity, assets, on-farm and development and income-generating
competitiveness, and nonfarm activities, microenterprise activities.
rural incomes agricultural
productivity, and
value of the marketed
output. Improved
rural infrastructure in
targeted areas.
(iv) Better models of Most recent IFC- IFC helped structure earlier PPP MU (3)
infrastructure finance facilitated PPP investments and partnered with the
and management, transactions not Development Bank of the Philippines to
including PPP operational or develop relevant local expertise.
canceled, except for Recently helped structure the first
the NAIA Expressway. hybrid PPP transaction (Clark Airport).
72
<<<PDF_PAGE_99>>>
Appendix A
Country Program Evaluation Outcome Ratings
Key World Bank Group
Engagement Area Main Results Contributions Ratinga
3. Better Services for the Poor MS (4)
(i) Poverty An effective system of World Bank analytical work and loans S (5)
measurement and poverty measurement informed and supported the
social protection in place; CCT transfers implementation of both Listahanan and
contributed 4Ps.
substantially to
poverty reduction.
(ii) Better service Considerable World Bank interventions through MS (4)
delivery in progress (albeit from Kalahi-CIDSS national community-
municipalities and a low base), but driven development and Philippine
communities overall an area of Rural Development Project improved
weakness, especially services in rural areas. However, many
related to the lack of systemic issues, including urban
administrative poverty, remain unaddressed.
capacity at the local
level and an overly
centralized system of
governance.
(iii) Human capital Access objectives World Bank helped improve access to MS (4)
development were substantially education and health services for the
achieved. Health poor. Program for quality
outcomes have been enhancements has potential, but there
mixed. Prospects for is no adequate monitoring of quality in
enhancements in place and no public availability of
education quality information.
remain unclear.
Health insurance
expanded to assist
the poor, but large
out-of-pocket
expenses remain an
issue.
4. Resilience to Natural Disasters, Climate Change, and Conflict MS (4)
Disaster risk Relevant sector Facilitated dialogue on a new risk MS (4)
management strategies and policies financing strategy and mechanism at
in place. Disaster the central government level. Successful
management financing instruments (two DPLs with a
department created. catastrophe deferred dropdown option,
Comprehensive flood a disaster bond, the Disaster Risk
management plan Financing and Insurance program, and
developed for Metro IFC-facilitated crop insurance)
Manila. Sewerage and contributed to increased resilience.
solid waste Facilitated private sector involvement in
73
<<<PDF_PAGE_100>>>
Appendix A
Country Program Evaluation Outcome Ratings
Key World Bank Group
Engagement Area Main Results Contributions Ratinga
management fell the water and sanitation sector. Limited
short of expectations. results on the local level.
Low implementation
capacity at the local
level poses high risks
to resilience.
Climate change Advanced policy and The Bank Group provided strategic and MS (4)
mitigation and institutional targeted lending and ASA, contributed
adaptation environment for to several pilots, applied new
mitigation in place, approaches, and increased awareness,
but the but on a smaller scale than planned and
implementation has not consistently across sectors.
been delayed and
objectives not
achieved. Greenhouse
gas emissions are
steeply rising.
Adaptation policies
continued, including
significant investment
in important areas
(sewerage), but much
more needs to be
done.
Peace and Peace agreements Better access to services and improved S (5)
reconciliation in with Moro Islamic livelihoods for 638,000 people in the
Mindanao Liberation Front Autonomous Region of Muslim
signed, Mindanao. World Bank programs
socioeconomic helped increase trust in communities
development and enabled communities and LGUs to
programs initiated, work together. The World Bank
and normalization provided capacity building to
process launched. Bangsamoro Development Agency.
Community
participation in
investment planning
in conflict-affected
areas improved.
Bangsamoro
Development Agency
developed into a
functional
organization.
74
<<<PDF_PAGE_101>>>
Appendix A
Country Program Evaluation Outcome Ratings
Key World Bank Group
Engagement Area Main Results Contributions Ratinga
Overall program MS (4)
rating
Note: 4Ps = Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program; ASA = Advisory Services and Analytics; CCT = conditional
cash transfer; CIDSS = Comprehensive and Integrated Delivery of Social Services; DPL = development policy
loan; IFC = International Finance Corporation; LGU = local government unit; NAIA = Ninoy Aquino International
Airport; PPP = public-private partnership; RCBC = Rizal Commercial Banking Corporation; SME = small and
medium enterprise.
a. IEG uses a six-point rating scale, with 1 being the lowest and 6 the highest: HU (1) = highly unsatisfactory; U
(2) = unsatisfactory; MU (3) = moderately unsatisfactory; MS (4) = moderately satisfactory; S (5) = satisfactory;
and HS (6) = highly satisfactory.
75
<<<PDF_PAGE_102>>>
Appendix B. List of People Interviewed
Government of the Philippines
Department of Agriculture
Roy Abaya Director
Danilo Alesna Deputy Project Director, Mindanao Cluster
Alexander Baluyut PPMIU Head, Provincia Project Management and
Implementation Unit
Charito A. Cadorna I REAP National Enterprise Development and Marketing Specialist,
Project Support Office
Frances Margaret C. Camacho PPMIU Head, Provincial Project Management and
Implementation Unit
Milva Carinan Planning Officer
Arnel De Mesa Regional Director
Hansel Didulo Assistant Secretary for Regulations
Ronel Ellorimo Economist, Project Support Office
Adamar Estrada Assistant Chief
Consolacion Gasacao Finance Unit Head, Project Support Office
Angelita Martir
Ara M. Morano Administrative Head, Project Support Office
Imma Camille Requilme Economist
Joseph Rico M&E Unit Head, Project Support Office
Sulpicio Untal Enterprise Development and Marketing Specialist, Project Support
Office
Ronnie Yulo I REAP Component Head, Project Support Office
Department of Agrarian Reform
Lucienne Fulgar Division Chief
Imelda Lamboon
Clemencia Padrinao
Department of Budget and Management
Florencio Abad Former Secretary
Marianne Fabian Focal Point for Open Government Partnership
Lilia Guillermo Undersecretary
Lea Nuñez Division Chief
Laura Pascua Undersecretary
Rolando Toledo Assistant Secretary
76
<<<PDF_PAGE_103>>>
Appendix B
List of People Interviewed
Department of Education
G.H. Ambat Assistant Secretary
Miriam Coprado
Lorna Dig Dino Undersecretary
Revsee A. Escobedo Assistant Secretary
Bro. Armin Luistro Former Secretary
Nepomuceno A. Malaluan Undersecretary
Jesus Mateo Undersecretary
Roger Masapol Director
Victoria L. Medrana Catibog Undersecretary
Milagros T. Talinio Director
Department of Finance
Romeo Bernardo Former Undersecretary
Karl Kendrick Chua Undersecretary
Soledad Emilia Cruz Assistant Secretary
Rosalia V. De Leon National Treasurer, Bureau of Treasury
Rommel Decis
Pamela Quizon Director
Cesar Purisima Former Secretary
Maria Edita Z. Tan Assistant Secretary
Alexandria Topacio Revenue Operations Group
Department of Health
Socorro Balbino Bureau of International Health Cooperation
Mar Wynn Bello Director, Bureau of International Health Cooperation
Maylene Beltran Director, Health Policy Development and Planning Bureau
Grace Buquiran Bureau of International Health Cooperation
Aleli Annie Grace Sudiacal Bureau of International Health Cooperation
Department of Public Works and Highways
Lydia Aguilar Engineer
Catalina Cabral Undersecretary
Mar del Castillo
Marlon V. Galerio Project Manager
Patrick B. Gatan Project Director
Shirley Medina Engineer
Emil Sadain Undersecretary
Violenda B. Sucro Project Manager
Emmanuel Supe Project Manager
77
<<<PDF_PAGE_104>>>
Appendix B
List of People Interviewed
Department of Social Welfare and Development
Cicero Juan Aguilar Former Deputy National Program Manager for Technical Services
Rhodora G. Alday Director
Esperanza Cabral Former Secretary
Camilo Gudmalin Undersecretary and Deputy National Program Director for
Operations of the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program
Vincent Andrew T. Leyson Director
Noel M. Macalalad Assistant Secretary
Lee Patarlas Former Community and National Finance Management Specialist
Rhea B. Peñaflor Assistant Secretary for Promotive Operations and Programs Group
Maria Benilda E. Redaja Former Director and National Program Manager
Dinky Soliman Former Secretary
Ernestina Z. Solloso Officer in Charge, National Program Manager
Department of the Interior and Local Government
Anna Liza F. Bonagua Director
Austere Panadero Former Undersecretary
Department of Trade and Industry
Ceferino Rodolfo Undersecretary
Rowel Barba Undersecretary
Government Procurement Policy Board
Maria Lora Alvarez
Elmira Cruz Caisido Deputy Executive Director
Diane Angela Marcos
Dennis Santiago Former Executive Director
Laguna Lake Development Authority
Adelina Santos Borja Department Manager
Jocelyn Siapno
National Economic and Development Authority
Gemma Agagas Monitoring and Evaluation
Gemma Bala Monitoring and Evaluation
Violeta S. Corpus Director, Monitoring and Evaluation
Rory Dacumos Agriculture, Natural Resources and Environment
Mary Anne Darauay Director, Social Development
Jesse David OIC Director, Monitoring and Evaluation
Reynaldo Delos Santos National Policy and Planning
Remedios Endencia Director, Regional Development
78
<<<PDF_PAGE_105>>>
Appendix B
List of People Interviewed
Givette Kristine Esguerra Infrastructure
Bien Ganapin OIC Director, Trade, Services and Industry
Judith Gondra Governance
William Ku Monitoring and Evaluation
Noel Quejada Monitoring and Evaluation
Calixto Mangilin Public Investment
Laurence Tibon Public Investment
Jonathan Uy Assistant Secretary
National Irrigation Administration
Angelina A. Abalos
Eden Garcia Central Office representative
Marilou S. Regonda
Benjamin N. Rivera Cluster head
Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process
Arvin Chua Director, Donor Coordination and Partnership Unit
Ma. Cecilia D. Papa OIC, Government MILF Panel Secretariat
Teresa Montemayor
Philippine Health Insurance Corporation
Jovita Aragona Chief Information Officer
Ruben John Basa External Vice President and Chief Operations Officer
Roehlano Briones
Rona Cacatian
Shirley Domingo Corporate Affairs Group
Bernadette Lico Senior Manager, Corporate Planning Department
Mary Jean Lim
Israel Francis Pargas Acting Senior Vice President, Health Finance Policy Sector
Evangeline F. Racelis Senior Manager, International and Local Engagement Department
Nerisa Santiago Acting Senior Vice President, Office of the Actuary
Melanie Santillan Acting Senior Manager, Benefits Development and Research
Narisa Portia Sugay Acting Vice President, Quality Assurance Group
Leila Tuazon Acting Senior Manager, Human Resource Department
Local Governments
Guiller Asido Administrator, Intramuros
Rojilyn Q. Bagabaldo Mayor of Paete
Aurora Ciego City Planning and Development Coordinator, Local Government of
Caloocan City
79
<<<PDF_PAGE_106>>>
Appendix B
List of People Interviewed
Anthony Damalerio Provincial Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Officer, Local
Government of Bohol
Arnulfo Lantaya Municipal Planning and Development Officer, Local Government of
Pantukan, Compostela Valley
Elizabeth Munda Councilor, Local Government of Tagabakid, Mati City, Davao
Oriental
Raul S. Palino Mayor of Teresa LGU
Melandres G. de Sagun Mayor of Trece Martires
Other Agencies
Ludell Alcala Development Management Officer, Climate Change Commission
Joshua Bingcang Vice President for Business Development and Operations Group,
Bases Conversion and Development Authority
Jose Victor Chan-Gonzaga Counselor, Philippine Embassy in the U.S.
Gemma Cunanan Head, Foreign Assisted Projects Management System
Francisco Dacumos Development Management Officer, Climate Change Commission
Windel Diangcalan Deputy Executive Director, Bangsamoro Development Agency
Marlon F. Pielago Municipal Environment and Natural Resources Office
Sandee Recabar Planning Officer and Chief of Implementation Oversight, Climate
Change Commission
Private Sector
Erwin Avante Vice President, Energy Development Corporation
Robert Baffrey General Manager, Clark Water Corporation
Arnel Boleche Relationship Manager, Rizal Commercial Banking Corporation
Francis Nicolas Chua FVP, Development Bank of the Philippines
John Thomas Deveras Senior EVP, Rizal Commercial Banking Corporation
Jo Ann Eala Senior Vice President, Bank of the Philippine Islands
Guillermo Luz Chairman, Livable Cities Challenge
Mariz Mandocdoc Vice President, Administration and Finance, Clark Development
Corporation
Jose Parreno Jr. President, Discovery World Corporation
Alfredo E. Pascual CEO, Institute of Corporate Directors
Princess Patricio Manila Water Company
Ferdinand Pecson Executive Director, Public-Private Partnership (PPP) Center
Honorio Poblador Managing Partner, Navegar
Luis Reyes Senior Vice President, Banco de Oro
Raymundo Roxas President, Rizal MicroBank
Jovito Sunga Manager, Clark International Airport
80
<<<PDF_PAGE_107>>>
Appendix B
List of People Interviewed
Angela Tinio Senior Vice President, Commercial and SME Banking Segment,
Rizal Commercial Banking Corporation
Walter Wassmer Senior EVP, Head of Institutional Banking, Banco de Oro
Civil Society (Academia, Think Tanks, NGOs)
Institute of Governance, De La Salle University
Jesse Robredo
Ian Jayson Hecita
Francisco Magno Director
Jessa Pacheco
Ador Torneo
International Alert
Francisco Lara Jr. Senior Peace and Conflict Adviser, Asia
Nikki de la Rosa Country Manager, Philippines
Kaizen Multipurpose Cooperative
Eufrocina Corachea Secretary
Evelyn Dimaandal General Manager
Caroline Lescano Treasurer
Mary Rose Sancho Bookkeeper
Alona Sobejana Member, Board of Directors
Sapang Multipurpose Cooperative
Sarah Agustin Clerk
Erwin Apaga Chairman
Maylen Bautista Bookkeeper
Mariano Carbonel Member, Board of Directors
Cesario Tabago General Manager
Other
Sam Chittick Country Representative, Asia Foundation
Eddie Edullantes President, Pangi Christian and Muslim Solidarity for Peace and
Development Organization, Pangi Maco, Compostela Valley
Nory Lamera Auditor, Magnaga Community Builders for Peace and
Development Association, Magnaga, Pantukan, Compostela Valley
Abhoud Syed Lingga Institute of Bangsamoro Studies
Abner Manlapaz President, Life Haven, Independent Living Center for Persons with
Disabilities
Ishak Mastura Convenor, Land Study Group, Transitional Justice and
Reconciliation Commission
81
<<<PDF_PAGE_108>>>
Appendix B
List of People Interviewed
Steven Muncy Executive Director, Community and Family Services International
Nasser Sinarimbo Project Coordinator, Community and Family Services International
Vicente Paqueo Research Fellow, Philippine Institute for Development Studies
Redempto Parafina Executive Director, Affiliated Network for Social Accountability in
East Asia and Pacific
Garry John Tampuso President, Tagabakid Muslim Christian Association, Mati, Davao
Oriental
Damaso Vertido Executive Director, Mindanao Land Foundation Inc.
Development Partners
Agence Française de Développement
Christophe Blanchot Country Director for the Philippines
Hugo Lecue Program Manager
Asian Development Bank
Oscar Amiel A. Badiola Program Officer, Philippines Country Office
Joven Balbosa Principal Country Specialist
Michael Barrow Director-General, Private Sector
Aekapol Chongvilaivan Country Economist
Martin Lemoine Private Sector
Lynnette Perez Senior Education Specialist
Sherwin Pu Private Sector
Karin Schelzig Senior Social Sector Specialist
Kenji Yuhaku Senior Adviser, Private Sector
Australia Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Peter Carreon Senior Program Officer, Development Section
Shannen Enriquez Program Officer, Political Section (Peace and Stability)
Nardia Simpson Counselor, Economic Section
Emmanuel Solis Senior Program Officer, Political Section
Ming Toh First Secretary, Economic Section
Embassy of Canada
Bryan Post
Narcisa Rivera Senior Program Officer
Stephen Weaver Head of Cooperation
EU Delegation to the Philippines
Willy Hick Project Manager for Cooperation
Emily Mercado Programme Manager
82
<<<PDF_PAGE_109>>>
Appendix B
List of People Interviewed
International Monetary Fund
Luis Breuer Mission Chief
Japan International Cooperation Agency
Shibata Atsushi Representative, Economic Growth Group
Mary Ann Bakisan Senior Program Office, Human Security Group
Yo Ebisawa Senior Representative
Erika Inoue Project Formulation Officer
Kawabuchi Kiyo Senior Representative
Catherine M. Palanca Senior Program Officer
Kessy Reyes Senior Program Officer, Human Security Group
Yoshida Wada Chief Representative
United Nations Agencies
Rosela Agcaoili Social Policy Specialist, UNICEF
Kristin Dadey Head of Mission, International Organization for Migration
Khalid Hassan Country Director, International Labour Organization
Tess Felipe Education Specialist, UNICEF
Andrew Parker Adviser, United Nations Development Programme
Julia Rees Deputy Representative, UNICEF
Ma. Concepcion Sardaña Senior Program Officer, International Labour Organization
Anjanette Saguisag Chief for Social Policy, UNICEF
E. World Bank Group
World Bank
Pablo Acosta Senior Economist
Christopher Ancheta Senior Sanitary Engineer
Dominic Aumentado Senior Procurement Specialist
Yolanda Azarcon Senior Operations Officer
Kevin Chua Economist
Lesley Cordero Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist
Victor Dato Senior Infrastructure Specialist
Gabriel Demombynes Program Leader
Abigail Dunleavy Former Consultant
Marcelo Fabre Senior Social Development Specialist
Birgit Hansl Country Manager
Lewis Hawke Lead Governance Specialist
Bert Hofman Former Country Director
Takiko Igarashi Education Specialist
Natalie Christine Jorge Former Consultant
Frauke Jungbluth Lead Agriculture Economist
83
<<<PDF_PAGE_110>>>
Appendix B
List of People Interviewed
Kai Kaiser Senior Economist
Chiyo Kanda Manager
Motoo Konishi Former Country Director
Ulrich Lachler Lead Economist (retired)
Eric Le Borgne Lead Economist
Lilanie Maitim Senior Operations Officer
Yasuhiko Matsuda Program Leader
Tomo Morimoto Senior Operations Officer
Robert Oelrichs Senior Health Specialist
Maria Loreto Padua Senior Social Development Specialist
Gerardo Parco Senior Operations Officer
Agata Pawlowska Portfolio Manager
Pia Peeters Senior Social Development Specialist
Andrew Ragatz Senior Education Specialist
Saeeda Sabah Rashid Senior Public Sector Specialist
Artessa Saldivar Sali Senior Municipal Engineer
Tom Sta. Maria Financial Management Specialist
Matthew Stephens Senior Social Development Specialist
Joop Stoutjesdijk Lead Irrigation and Drainage Specialist
Lada Strelkova Country Program Coordinator
Roy Tordecilla Social Development Specialist
Maya Villaluz Senior Environment Engineer
Georgia Wallen Senior Country Officer
Mara Warwick Country Director
Fang Xu Senior Transport Specialist
Yan Zhang Urban Economist
Maribelle Zonaga Senior Operations Officer
International Finance Corporation
Farida Lasida Adji Senior Private Sector Specialist
Lulu Baclagon Senior Investment Officer
Val Bagatsing Principal Investment Officer
Melba Baltasar Operations Analyst
Thuy Thu Bui Senior Investment Officer
Gerlin May Catangui Senior Private Sector Specialist
Paula Felipe Senior Operations Officer
Roberto Martin Galang Senior Private Sector Specialist
Donna Gonzales Senior Investment Officer
Helen Han Senior Investment Officer
Mikio Ishiguro Investment Officer
Conrad de Jesus Operations Officer
84
<<<PDF_PAGE_111>>>
Appendix B
List of People Interviewed
Yuji Kano Principal Investment Officer
Mei Li Investment Officer
Natalie Macawaris Consultant
Colin Raymond Lead Financial Sector Specialist
Saima Rehman Investment Officer
Gay Santos Senior Financial Sector Specialist
Hans Shrader Senior Private Sector Specialist
Rick van der Kamp Senior Operations Officer
Wendy Jo Werner Country Manager, Bangladesh
Jane Yuan Xu Country Manager, the Philippines
Aileen Ruiz Zarate Senior Investment Officer
85
<<<PDF_PAGE_112>>>
Appendix C. World Bank Group Strategic Objectives and Country
Program Evaluation Framework
Table C.1. Philippines Strategic Engagement, FY10–19
Strategic Objective 2: Strategic Objective 3: Cross-Cutting
Strategy Strategic Objective 1: Improved Investment Better Public Service Strategic Objective 4: Theme: Good
Document Stable Macro Economy Climate Delivery Reduced Vulnerabilities Governance
FY10–12 Country Fiscal and financial stability Enabling business environment Public service delivery in Social protection system Governance and
Assistance Strategy through consolidation and to key sectors anticorruption in
improved promote competitiveness, selected national
macroeconomic risk productivity and government
agencies
management employment
Financial services Basic service delivery in Disaster risk management Procurement and
poor areas and climate change public financial
management
reforms at national
and local levels
Stability and peace Better local
governance
through more
effective
decentralization
FY15–18 Country Engagement Area 1: Engagement Area 2: Engagement Area 3: Engagement Area 4: Engagement Area
Partnership Strategy Transparent and Accountable Empowerment of the Poor and Rapid, Inclusive, and Climate Change, 5: Peace,
Governance Vulnerable Sustained Economic Environment, and Disaster Institution Building
Growth Risk Management and Economic
Opportunity
86
<<<PDF_PAGE_113>>>
Appendix C
World Bank Group Strategic Objectives and Country Program Evaluation Framework
Strategic Objective 2: Strategic Objective 3: Cross-Cutting
Strategy Strategic Objective 1: Improved Investment Better Public Service Strategic Objective 4: Theme: Good
Document Stable Macro Economy Climate Delivery Reduced Vulnerabilities Governance
Strengthen public finances Improve poverty measurement Strengthened economic Increased resilience to Increase trust
and fiscal risk management and socioeconomic data policy natural disaster and within
systems climate change communities, and
between citizens
and the state in
conflict-affected
areas
Strengthened public sector Improve health status Improved investment Improve natural resource Development and
institutions (national and climate, including access management and implementation of
subnational) to finance, especially for sustainable development Peace Dividend
micro and small program for
enterprises Bangsamoro
Strengthened pressure for Improve quality of basic Increase economic
government accountability education and improved access growth, productivity, and
for the vulnerable employment in agricultural
and rural areas
Strengthen social protection
system
FY15–19 Country Engagement Area 1: Engagement Area 2: Engagement Area 3: Engagement Area 4: Engagement Area
Partnership Strategy Transparent and Accountable Empowerment of the Poor and Rapid, Inclusive, and Climate Change, 5: Peace,
(as updated by the Governance Vulnerable Sustained Economic Environment, and Disaster Institution Building
FY17 Performance Growth Risk Management and Economic
and Learning Review) Opportunity
Increased public revenue Increased coverage and use of Improved transport Increased resilience to Increased access
mobilization health services connectivity natural disasters and to basic services in
climate change
87
<<<PDF_PAGE_114>>>
Appendix C
World Bank Group Strategic Objectives and Country Program Evaluation Framework
Strategic Objective 2: Strategic Objective 3: Cross-Cutting
Strategy Strategic Objective 1: Improved Investment Better Public Service Strategic Objective 4: Theme: Good
Document Stable Macro Economy Climate Delivery Reduced Vulnerabilities Governance
conflict-affected
areas
Improved quality and Improve quality of basic Streamlined business Reduction in pollution Improved
transparency of public education registration and trade community
financial reporting logistics participation in
investment
planning in
conflict-affected
areas
Increased social protection Increased access to Increased access to clean
coverage financial services energy
Improved access to basic Improved agriculture
services and local planning productivity and incomes
88
<<<PDF_PAGE_115>>>
Appendix C
World Bank Group Strategic Objectives and Country Program Evaluation Framework
Table C.2. Engagement Areas for the FY10–18 Country Program Evaluation
Macroeconomic Stability
and Good Governance Private Sector–Led Growth Better Services for the Poor Improving Resilience
Public financial management Investment climate and regulations Increased social protection coverage Disaster Risk Management
and fiscal stabilization: • Improved investment climate • Better poverty measurement • Increase physical and financial
• Fiscal and financial • Streamlined business • Improved social safety nets resilience to natural disasters
stability and improved registration and trade logistics • Infrastructure investment
• Effective conditional cash
macroeconomic risk
transfer programs • Improved access to transport
management
Private sector development
connectivity (disaster risk
• Increased public • Increased access to financial management perspective)
revenue mobilization services Improved delivery of services
• Improved water and sanitation
• Improved fiscal • Improved agricultural • Increased coverage and use of systems
transparency and competitiveness and health services
accountability productivity • Improve quality of basic Climate change and environment
• Improved quality and • Higher incomes and education • Improve natural resource
management
transparency of public employment in rural areas • Effective community-driven
financial reporting development programs • Improved pollution reduction
• Improved access to transport
Improved expenditure efficiency connectivity (private sector • Increased access to clean energy
and targeting Institutional development perspective) Fragility, conflict, and violence
capacity building
• Better models of • Increased access to basic
• Strengthened public infrastructure finance and services in conflict-affected areas
sector institutions management, including (Mindanao)
(including at the local public-private partnerships
• Improved community participation
level)
in investment planning in conflict-
• Strengthened
affected areas
demand-side pressure
• Increase trust within communities,
for accountability
and between citizens and the
• Procurement reform
state in conflict-affected areas
• Decentralization
89
<<<PDF_PAGE_116>>>
Appendix D. Partnerships
Partnerships were a key component of the World Bank Group’s program in the Philippines. The Bank
Group engaged with national, local, and international stakeholders on program development, funding,
implementation, and delivery to strengthen partnership with the government of the Philippines and
increase cooperation with the donor community and development partners.
Partnerships with Bilateral and Multilateral Agencies
The partnership with bilateral and multilateral development partners and donors was demonstrated
through project and program planning, implementation, and cofinancing.
The Asian Development Bank (ADB), one of the World Bank’s key partners in the Philippines, provided
parallel funding to both Pantawid and Kalahi-CIDSS (Kapit-Bisig Laban sa Kahirapan-Comprehensive
and Integrated Delivery of Social Services) programs. This cooperation played an important advocacy
role when the new administration started having reservations about the program and was about to
close it. The fact that both the Bank Group and the ADB had ongoing programs of support for the
Pantawid was crucial in persuading the government not to defund the program. The Bank Group and
ADB also worked together on the 2016 Philippines Development Forum to discuss new policy
directions of the government at early stage.
The European Union is a key partner in funding and delivering on programs in several areas, including
fragility, conflict, and violence and energy. The World Bank works closely with European partners
under Access to Sustainable Energy, a €60 million program for which €29 million is administered by
the World Bank (€11 million is World Bank executed). The program distributes 40,500 solar systems
and installs 11MW of photovoltaic panels, mainly in Mindanao.
Another important World Bank partner in project implementation was the United Nations through its
various agencies. One of the most visible partnerships was with the United Nations Development
Programme, with which the World Bank created and jointly administered the Facility for Advisory
Support for Transition Capacities. The facility was a major source of technical and financial assistance
to the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, the government, and the Bangsamoro Development Agency for
on-demand training, policy advice, research, and access to a pool of experts to help address key
issues for transition to the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao (BARMM). However,
the United Nations Development Programme and World Bank are currently again at odds regarding
management of the upcoming Bangsamoro Normalization Trust Fund. Other United Nations agencies
that joined the World Bank’s work in the Philippines included the International Labour Organization
(recipient from the Mindanao Trust Fund), United Nations Children’s Fund, and the World Health
Organization (upgrading procurement in the health sector-vaccine procurement).
The Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) has a traditionally large and important presence in
the Philippines and has been an important partner. The Bank Group engaged with JICA on private
90
<<<PDF_PAGE_117>>>
Appendix D
Partnerships
investment and job creation in the agriculture sector in Mindanao and the Autonomous Region of
Muslim Mindanao (ARMM). One attempt was through HARVEST, a $320 million project to which the
World Bank was to commit $130 million. The project’s aim was to support large private corporate
investments, encourage micro, small, and medium enterprises, and help producers operate at scale
through cooperative alliances. The target was to provide $265 million in loans, generate investments of
$332 million, and create 45,000 jobs. Although the project was dropped, the World Bank’s
cooperation with JICA was fruitful, because in 2017 JICA launched a $45 million agribusiness lending
facility with the Land Bank, using elements of the HARVEST model.
The World Bank worked with a few other development partners. It coordinated closely with the
International Monetary Fund on macroeconomic policy recommendations and technical assistance,
especially on tax policy, and worked jointly with the ADB and JICA on harmonizing national
procurement rules. The Bank Group strengthened cooperation with development partners, having
similar concerns on operational matters or business processes. To this end, the World Bank, ADB and
JICA conducted joint portfolio reviews with the government to address project implementation issues
that impacted the respective agencies’ portfolios. Development partners also set up the Philippine
Learning Center on Environmental and Social Sustainability to promote environmental and social
safeguards and standards.
As co-chair of the Philippines Development Forum (alongside the government), the Bank Group
facilitated dialogue among government stakeholders and development partners on the country’s
policy reform agenda and its impact on development assistance. The World Bank was the convener of
a few working groups under the Philippines Development Forum, including one on growth and
investment climate and one on Mindanao. However, in recent years, according to some views within
the government, the working groups’ meetings were less productive.
Trust funds played an important role in the delivery of the World Bank program in the Philippines.
Development partners financially supported the World Bank in several areas, including fragility, conflict,
and violence, macrofiscal policy, governance, disaster risk management, and social protection. Two
trust funds crucial for the World Bank’s engagements in the Philippines were the Mindanao Trust
Fund, focusing on peace building and development, and the Australia Trust Fund, covering a wide
range of topics from public finance to disaster risk management.
Partnerships with Civil Society and Other Local Partners
The Bank Group maintained strong dialogue with civil society organizations (CSOs) that provided
valuable perspective on country development issues and on the Bank Group’s partnership with the
government. For example, the World Bank engaged with CSOs while preparing the 2009 Country
Assistance Strategy and the 2014 Country Partnership Strategy. The engagement worked in different
ways— from consultations for flagship reports (such as the Mindanao Jobs Report) to increased
outreach to youth leaders and online influencers. The World Bank partnered with the Knowledge for
Development Community, which comprises higher learning, institutions, foundations, and policy and
91
<<<PDF_PAGE_118>>>
Appendix D
Partnerships
research entities, to promote constructive dialogue with different entities, including local government,
business groups, and media. The Knowledge for Development Community’s university partners, such
as Central Philippine University in Iloilo and Notre Dame University in Cotabato City, coorganized focus
group consultations for the 2017 Performance and Learning Review.
CSOs were important partners for the World Bank for activities related to fragility, conflict, and violence
and governance. The World Bank helped International Alert to establish the Bangsamoro Conflict
Monitoring System, a subnational violence tracking database used by stakeholders engaged in the
Mindanao peace process. At the same time, the World Bank built strong partnerships with the local
CSO community under the Open Government Partnership and other demand-side governance
programs.
The International Finance Corporation (IFC) established successful partnerships with local private
sector entities to provide holistic solutions to smallholder farmers to foster sustainable businesses.
One example is the long-term partnership with the Center for Agriculture and Rural Development, Rizal
Microbank, and Bayer to provide inputs (such as planting seeds), crop protection, and insurance
tailored to the specific needs of local smallholder farms. IFC helped build the capacity of financial
institutions, while Bayer trained farmers using IFC-customized modules on farmer engagement skills
and financial literacy.
The World Bank could further strengthen partnerships based on the already solid foundation. This
would be particularly relevant for cooperation with the local research and academic community
through potential integration of local think tanks and universities into the delivery of the Advisory
Services and Analytics, going beyond outsourcing of training courses. For instance, the World Bank
worked successfully with the Asian Institute of Management on the development of a procurement
training course but could also have used grant funding for analytical and advisory work to enhance
local research capabilities. A more holistic intervention is needed at the Bank Group level to promote
private sector–led agribusiness development for smallholders. This should be done through integrated
partnerships (for example, rural financial products, inputs, extension services, training or coaching)
with the private sector, and this should lead to market development and yield incremental results. The
World Bank should expand the climate change lending programs based on Advisory Services and
Analytics work in areas where it has a comparative advantage and should work closely with the
development partners, moving from shared information to harmonization of strategies and activities to
advance the climate change agenda, especially by building capacity at the local level.
92
<<<PDF_PAGE_119>>>
Appendix E. Gender Coverage
Gender Equality in the Philippines
The Philippines fares well globally on gender equality and has recorded gains in the political
participation of women; however, challenges remain in attaining key Millennium Development Goals
affecting women and their participation in the labor market. The Philippines is generally perceived as a
relatively successful model of gender equality and strong on gender equity in education. The 2018
World Economic Forum Global Gender Gap Report ranked the Philippines 8th out of 149 countries
and tied for first on educational attainment. The country ranks well on economic opportunity (14th) and
political empowerment (13th) but lower on health (42nd), as maternal mortality remains relatively high
(WEF 2018). School enrollment for girls and other education indicators surpass those of boys, and
efforts have shifted to getting more boys to complete secondary, higher, and tertiary education. Even
though political parties tend to be male dominated, there has been a marked increase in the number
of women elected to the House of Representatives and in the number of female mayors. However,
few are present in the top tier of the government: only 3 of the 20 cabinet secretaries of the current
administration are women. Employment and unemployment rates for men and women are roughly the
same, but only about half of women participate in the labor force, compared with almost 80 percent of
men. Further, women dominate in traditional, socially ascribed careers—household work, education,
and health care.
Gender in World Bank Group Programs
In partnership with the Philippine Commission on Women and the National economic Development
Authority, a country gender assessment was completed in 2013 as input to the 2014 Country
Partnership Strategy. The strategy committed ensuring that gender considerations were
mainstreamed into operations, consistent with both its own and the government’s policies. Since
2009, the World Bank has conducted an annual assessment of the Philippines portfolio to assess
progress in gender mainstreaming and identify gaps. The major strengths of projects in gender and
development mainstreaming include equal representation of women and men in the design and
implementation of key activities, availability of sex‐disaggregated data, and presence of gender focal
points on project teams.
The Pantawid conditional cash transfer program pays cash grants for education and health to women.
Secondary and tertiary education have a higher share of girls than boys and at some point, consideration
may have to be given to incentives to get more boys to complete schooling and move on to college. Both
the Pantawid and Kalahi-CIDSS (Kapit-Bisig Laban sa Kahirapan-Comprehensive and Integrated Delivery of
Social Services) programs have focused on empowering women by getting them to organize family
development sessions and serving as contact points and community leaders in the barangays. Women
were also empowered by other World Bank programs. For example, half the beneficiaries of the Mindanao
Rural Development Project supporting income-generating micro-enterprise activities in agriculture were
93
<<<PDF_PAGE_120>>>
Appendix E
Gender Coverage
women. Under the project’s Community Fund for Agriculture Development 4,000 livelihood and micro-
enterprise subprojects were developed, involving 180,000 beneficiaries; 46 percent of these were women.
In the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) region, 51 percent of the 638,000 beneficiaries of
the community-driven development (CDD) subprojects under the Mindanao Trust Fund are women and
41 percent of the members of the People’s Organizations -the entities implementing CDD interventions—
were female. The participatory approach of the Mindanao Trust Fund fostering social unity and building trust
between stakeholders has enabled women, who are often marginalized from decision-making processes,
to get involved in the CDD subprojects. Testimonies from the evaluation mission indicate that People’s
Organizations with women members in conflict areas in ARMM have been quite effective in implementing
the CDD subprojects. Women are one of the most vulnerable groups during conflict, they tend to be more
passionate in pushing the peace and development agenda forward in their communities, and they better
appreciate the difference the peace dividends could bring. At the same time, some Mindanao Trust Fund
donors highlighted that they wished that the World Bank had made more efforts at gender analysis to take a
deliberate path in addressing gender issues in the interventions.
Gender aspects are also important in disaster risk management, because natural disasters
disproportionately tend to negatively affect women and children. Similarly, shelters and relocation
create issues for women because their security and needs are often not met in these temporary
accommodations. The Advisory Services and Analytics on in-city versus off-city resettlement were
likely favorable to women and children. Also, poor women living in informal settlements close to
sewers depend on water supply, sanitation, and waste collection for their daily chores and well-being.
The provision of water supply and sewerage services in Metro Manila and interventions around Laguna
Bay to reduce pollution and improve environmental quality had a positive impact on women’s lives.
Other World Bank interventions, such as the Participatory Irrigation Development project, helped
increase women’s presence in Irrigation Associations from zero to 20 percent and trained indigenous
women in basket making, as an alternative livelihood.
In 2014, the International Finance Corporation supported the development of Rizal Commercial
Banking Corporation’s (RCBC) Small and Medium Enterprises Lending Program for Women in the
Philippines. It included development of a customer value proposition for women. This allowed RCBC
to institutionalize the brand, making it available to cash management, investments, and other services.
Seminars, trade fairs, and forums with professional women groups were rolled out, providing avenues
for clients and nonclients to expand their networks and broaden their business know-how. The eWMN
program was awarded the International Finance Corporation’s CEO Gender Award for promoting
gender smart solutions in banking. RCBC was named the Philippines’ Small and Medium Enterprise
Bank of the Year in 2015 by Asian Banking and Finance for its upgraded RCBC Gender program that
comes with added features, including the creation of dedicated women champions, business
education and training seminars, networking forums, and tie-ups with professional women’s groups,
among others, as it shifted from the traditional “transactional banking” to “relationship banking.” The
program has disbursed more than 2,000 loans to small and medium enterprises amounting to
94
<<<PDF_PAGE_121>>>
Appendix E
Gender Coverage
$120 million from 2014 to 2016 with nonperforming loans share below 1 percent as of December
2016.
Reference
WEF (World Economic Forum). 2018. Global Gender Gap Report. Geneva: WEF.
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GGGR_2018.pdf.
95
<<<PDF_PAGE_122>>>
Appendix F. Mindanao Conflict Background
Detailed Timeline of Conflict in Muslim Mindanao
1970—Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF) is founded.
1972—President Ferdinand Marcos declares Martial Law.
1976—Signing of the Tripoli Agreement, providing a framework for autonomy.
1984—Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF), a breakaway group of the MNLF is established.
1990—Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao is established, based on an agreement with MNLF.
2000—All-out war between the Philippine armed forces and MILF under President Joseph Estrada.
2003—President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo brokers peace talks with MILF.
2008—Conflict intensifies as peace talks are declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court.
2011—President Aquino resumes Peace Negotiations with the MILF in Narita, Japan.
2012—Negotiations for Bangsamoro Framework conclude.
2014 – Signing of the Comprehensive Agreement on the Bangsamoro leads to the Bangsamoro Basic Law
(BBL) submission to Congress.
2015—Mamasapano Incident (ambush and killing of 44 national police, 18 MILF members, and 4 citizens).
Passage of the BBL is stalled.
2016—Newly elected President Rodrigo Duterte pushes to pass the BBL.
2017—Congress begins reading of the BBL in the Parliament.
2018—President Duterte signs the Bangsamoro Organic Law (formerly BBL)
2019—Plebiscites in Southern Mindanao ratify the Bangsamoro Organic Law and the establishment of the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao to replace Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao.
Mindanao Conflict History
Mindanao is one of the three major islands of the Philippines located in the southern part of the
country, the other two being Luzon and Visayas. Mindanao has 26 provinces, and five of its provinces
are mired in violent conflict, namely Maguindanao (including Cotabato City), Lanao del Sur, Basilan
(including Isabela City), Sulu, and Tawi-Tawi—all of which make up the Autonomous Region of Muslim
Mindanao (ARMM).
Conflict in Mindanao is multilayered, characterized by separatism, communist insurgency, banditry,
and rido or clan wars. In addition to independent bandits present in Mindanao, the separatist groups
and communist insurgents are also both linked to acts of terrorism and banditry.
Three centuries before the Philippine government was established in 1898, a governance structure
was already in place in Mindanao in the form of a sultanate system. Mindanao’s population comprises
the Bangsamoro population or the Moros, the majority of which are Muslims. In the 1800s, the
Spanish colonizers were not able to penetrate Mindanao due to fierce resistance from the Moros.
During the American occupation in the early 1900s, however, the U.S. government encouraged
96
<<<PDF_PAGE_123>>>
Appendix F
Mindanao Conflict Background
Filipino Christians to migrate to Mindanao and establish businesses. Land grabbing became prevalent
wherein many of the Moros, unaware of the new government policies, lost their lands to the elite
Christian-Filipino settlers (Vellema, Boras, and Lara 2011).
The Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF) and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) are the two
leading separatist movements in the Philippines. The MNLF started the armed struggle for
independence from the Philippine government in 1972. In 1996, the MNLF and the government signed
a peace agreement, which granted autonomy to provinces in Southern Mindanao with a Muslim
majority population. Basilan, Lanao del Sur, Maguindanao, Tawi-Tawi, and Sulu form the ARMM,
which has a population of roughly 3.8 million (as of 2015); 89 percent of which are Muslims.
MNLF demobilized as a result of the establishment of ARMM; however, a group of MNLF members
who did not agree with autonomy demanded a complete independence and mobilized a splinter
group called the MILF. The MILF continued the armed struggle for independence until they reached a
negotiated solution that led to a bilateral ceasefire in 1997 and the start of formal peace negotiations in
1999.
The peace negotiations between the government and the MILF lasted from 1997 to 2014. Alongside
the peace negotiations, sporadic clashes between government forces and the rebel groups continued
(Herbolzheimer 2015). In 2014, the Aquino administration and the MILF signed a peace agreement
leading to the preparation of the Bangsamoro Basic Law (BBL), which establishes a political identity
for the Bangsamoro people. Legislation of the BBL was stalled, however, for some reasons, such as
the alleged killing of 44 policemen by the MILF in early 2015 (which created distrust among legislators
and prompted them to halt the signing of the BBL); and the Congress’ stance about the
unconstitutionality of the BBL. Although the peace process was ongoing, the MNLF (the rival of MILF)
and the newly formed Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters waged violent attacks to civilians and
soldiers to express their opposition to the peace process and/or grievance of being excluded from the
BBL discussions. The MNLF leader Nur Misuari became a fugitive after leading a violent attack in
Zamboanga City but was later given an amnesty by President Duterte. The MNLF leader met with the
President in November 2016, and this marked the willingness of the rival separatist groups (MNLF and
MILF) to work together to achieve peace in Mindanao.
On 26 July 2018, President Duterte finally signed the BBL, calling it the Bangsamoro Organic Law
(BOL). The BOL provides for self-determination by the Bangsamoro people within the framework of
the Philippine Constitution and norms and standards of the international law. The ARMM is now called
the BARMM (Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao), which is empowered to enact
its own laws. The BARMM will automatically receive an annual block grant (5 percent of the net tax
revenue of the Philippine government); 75 percent share from the government’s revenue taxes,
charges, fees, and taxes imposed on natural resources; and ₱5 billion annually for 10 years, which will
be used to rehabilitate the conflict-affected areas.1
97
<<<PDF_PAGE_124>>>
Appendix F
Mindanao Conflict Background
Similar to the former ARMM, the BARMM also covers the provinces of Basilan, Lanao del Sur,
Maguindanao, Sulu, and Tawi-Tawi. A plebiscite on the ratification of the BOL was held in early 2019.
The plebiscite also determines whether the 39 barangays in North Cotabato, 6 municipalities in Lanao
del Norte, and the cities of Cotabato City in Maguindanao and Isabela in Basilan will be included in the
Bangsamoro territory. As of the writing of this report, official results of the plebiscite have not yet been
released by the Philippine Commission on Election.
References
Vellema, S., S. Boras Jr., and F. Lara Jr. 2011. “The Agrarian Roots of Contemporary Violent Conflict in Mindanao,
Southern Philippines.” Journal of Agrarian Change 11 (3): 298–320.
Herbolzheimer, K. 2015. “The Peace Process in Mindanao, the Philippines: Evolution and Lessons Learned.”
Report, December. Oslo: Norwegian Peacebuilding Resource Center.
1 Philippines. (2018, July 23). Republic Act No. 11054
98
<<<PDF_PAGE_125>>>
Appendix G. Country Program Evaluation
Methodology
The analytical approach used by the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) is guided by the 2005
Country Assistance Evaluation Retrospective undertaken by the Operations Evaluation Department of
the World Bank.
Country Program Evaluation Methodology
Country Program Evaluation s rate outcomes of World Bank Group assistance programs, rather than
the country’s overall development progress. In Country Program Evaluation s, IEG rates only the
outcome of the Bank Group’s program, not the country’s overall development outcome, although the
latter is clearly relevant for judging the program’s outcome. Assessments of assistance program
outcomes and Bank Group performance are not the same. The assistance program’s outcome is
determined by the impact of four agents: (i) the country; (ii) the Bank Group; (iii) partners and other
stakeholders; and (iv) exogenous forces. IEG measures Bank Group performance primarily on the
basis of contributory actions the Bank Group directly controlled. Judgments regarding Bank Group
performance typically consider the relevance and implementation of the strategy, the design and
supervision of the Bank Group’s lending and financial support interventions, the scope, quality and
follow-up of diagnostic work and other AAA, the consistency of the Bank Group’s lending and financial
support with its nonlending work and with its safeguard policies, and the Bank Group’s partnership
activities.
Evaluating and Rating World Bank Group Program Outcomes
In rating the outcome of an assistance program, IEG gauges the extent to which major strategic
objectives were relevant and achieved. In other words, did the Bank Group do the right thing, and did
it do it right? Programs typically express goals in terms of higher-order objectives, such as poverty
reduction. The Country Assistance Strategy may also establish intermediate goals, such as improved
targeting of social services or promotion of integrated rural development and specify how they are
expected to contribute toward achieving the higher-order objective. IEG’s task is then to validate
whether the intermediate objectives were the right ones and whether they produced satisfactory net
benefits, as well as whether the results chain specified in the strategy was valid. Where causal links
were not fully specified in the Country Assistance Strategy, the evaluator reconstructs the causal chain
from the available evidence and assesses relevance, efficacy, and outcome with reference to the
intermediate and higher-order objectives.
For each of the main objectives, the Country Program Evaluation evaluates the relevance of the
objective and the Bank Group’s strategy toward meeting the objective, including the balance between
lending and nonlending instruments; the efficacy with which the strategy was implemented; and the
results achieved. This is done in two steps. The first is a top-down review of whether the Bank
Group’s program achieved a particular Bank Group objective or planned outcome and had a
99
<<<PDF_PAGE_126>>>
Appendix G
Country Program Evaluation Methodology
substantive impact on the country’s development. The second step is a bottom-up review of the Bank
Group’s products and services (lending, AAA, and aid coordination) used to achieve the objective.
Together these two steps test the consistency of findings from the products and services and the
development impact dimensions. Subsequently, IEG makes an assessment of the relative contribution
to the results achieved by the Bank Group, other development partners, the government and
exogenous factors.
Evaluators also assess the degree of country ownership of international development priorities, such
as the Millennium Development Goals, and Bank Group corporate advocacy priorities, such as
safeguards.
100
<<<PDF_PAGE_127>>>
Appendix H. Portfolio Review
This review provides a statistical snapshot of the volume and structure of the World Bank Group
lending and knowledge programs in the Philippines; describes the outcomes of the portfolio review by
engagement areas (pillars); and presents a semistructured evaluation of the knowledge (Advisory
Services and Analytics [ASA]) program. Portfolio review by engagement areas covers the period of
FY10–18 and includes projects that were either approved in FY10–18 or closed in FY11–18. It is made
up of International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and International Finance
Corporation (IFC) financing, World Bank ASA, IFC lending and Advisory Services, and World Bank–
managed trust funds (TFs). Actual lending disbursement (as opposed to commitment) is used for
closed projects, and committed amounts are used for projects approved during the reviewed period
review.
Portfolio Statistics
The overall portfolio comprises 32 IBRD loans (nine of which received additional financing during the
review period)1 with total commitment or lending of $7,034 million; 99 TF-financed (World Bank–
managed) projects totaling $347 million; 201 World Bank ASA with total cost of $72.7 million; 31 IFC
investments with total net commitment of $1,212 million; and 34 IFC AS.
Figure H.1. World Bank Lending Portfolio Approved in FY10–18, by Global Practice
and Fiscal Year
a. By Global Practice b. By fiscal year and Global Practice
World Bank lending. During the period reviewed, the World Bank portfolio included 32 lending
projects—26 IPF and six development policy loans (DPLs)—for a total commitment of $7,034 million
(additional financing or subsidiary financing projects are not counted as separate projects, financing
added to the parent project). The largest share of lending was under the Social, Urban, Rural, and
Resilience (SURR) Global Practice (26 percent) followed by Social Protection and Labor (SPL;
20 percent) and Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment (MTI; 19 percent; figure H.1, panel a) The
portfolio included 14 projects approved during the period reviewed with a commitment of
101
<<<PDF_PAGE_128>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
$5,392 million and 18 projects approved before the reviewed period and closed during it with a
commitment of $1,642 million. The approvals were mostly in SURR (27 percent), MTI (25 percent),
and SPL (18 percent), the lending volume of approvals was highest in FY12–17, and steeply dropped
in FY17–18 (figure H.1, panel b).
The FY10–13 Country Assistance Strategy envisaged a $4,350 million lending program of which
$1,950 million was approved. The FY15–18 Country Partnership Strategy (extended to FY19) planned
lending of $3,420 million of which $2,380 million was approved. In FY14, three unplanned projects
amounting to $1,270 million were approved (after typhoon Haiyan). Commitment and disbursement
amounts are reflected in figure H.2. There is a sizable gap between commitments and disbursements,
with an increase in this gap in FY16 reflecting the change in government.
Figure H.2. World Bank Lending Commitment and Disbursement, FY10–18
TF financing. During the period reviewed, the Philippines portfolio included 99 TF-financed projects
totaling $347 million; the Energy and Extractives Global Practice accounted for the highest amount
($89.2 million, 8 projects), followed by Transport ($51.3, 9 projects), Environment ($49.6 million, 17
projects), and SURR ($48.6 million, 30 projects; figure H.3).
102
<<<PDF_PAGE_129>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
Figure H.3. Trust Fund Financing by Practice, FY10–18
Note: AGR = Agriculture; CLC = Climate Change; EAE = Energy and Extractives; EDU = Education; ENV = Environment and Natural
Resources; GOV = Governance; HNP = Health, Nutrition, and Population; MTI = Macroeconomics, Trade, and Investment; TDD =
Transport and Digital Development; URS = Social, Urban, Rural, and Resilience; WAT = Water.
The total ASA portfolio during the period reviewed comprised 210 projects, of which 201 projects
were delivered with total cost of $72.7 million. The greatest number of ASA was delivered by SURR
Global Practice (46 projects, cost $16 million), followed by Governance (23 projects, $11 million),
Water (13 projects, cost $8 million), and TDD (16 projects, cost $7 million). ASA cost increased to
$11.5 million in 2015 from $3.2 million the previous year and further to $25.5 million in 2016 from an
average of $3.6 million per annum in FY10–14 (figure H.4).
103
<<<PDF_PAGE_130>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
Figure H.4. World Bank Advisory Services and Analytics, FY10–18, by Global
Practice and Fiscal Year
a. By Global Practice b. By fiscal year
Note: AGR = Agriculture; CLC = Climate Change; EAE = Energy and Extractives; EDU = Education; ENV = Environment and Natural
Resources; FCI = Finance, Competitiveness, and Innovation; GOV = Governance; HNP = Health, Nutrition, and Population; MTI =
Macroeconomics, Trade, and Investment; N/A = not applicable; POV = Poverty; SPL = Social Protection and Labor; TDD =
Transport and Digital Development; URS = Social, Urban, Rural, and Resilience; WAT = Water.
Portfolio performance. The Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) evaluated 29 IBRD loans closed
during the review period with total commitment of $2,880 million: 58.6 percent of the projects are
rated MS+ (89.7 percent weighted by value). Philippines’ portfolio performance is comparable to that
of China and is above East Asia and Pacific and World Bank averages. Risk to development outcome
(RDO) for the Philippines is marginally above the average for the region but below the global average.
Similarly, 64.6 percent of resources were invested in projects with moderate or lower RDO. SURR
performed better than other practices (41 percent rated MS+) second only to SPL (37 percent)
weighted by commitment size (35 percent).
The share of projects at risk during FY10–18 was 19.1 percent, slightly higher than Vietnam
(15.9 percent) and China (15.7 percent) but comparable to the regional average (18.9 percent) and
better than the World Bank–wide average (23.3 percent). Weighted by commitment amount, the
Philippines presented a lower risk (10.5 percent) compared with Vietnam (12.6 percent) and China
(14.8 percent), the region (15 percent) and World Bank–wide (20.2 percent). The Philippines had much
higher share of dropped projects (48 percent), compared with regional comparators (figure H.5).
104
<<<PDF_PAGE_131>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
Figure H.5. World Bank Lending: Approved and Dropped Projects, FY10–18
140 50%
48%
45%
120
40%
38%
100 35%
30%
80
60 56 81 24% 114 25%
20%
40 15%
21 11% 10%
20 35 26 19 14 5%
0 0%
Indonesia Vietnam Philippines China
# Dropped Proj # Approved Proj % of Dropped Proj
Note: Includes additional financing or subsidiary financing projects.
IFC and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency. During FY10–18, IFC had 31 investment
projects representing a total net commitment of $1,212 million. IFC provided 34 Advisory Services
amounting to $61 million, largely for cross-cutting advisory solutions (41 percent) followed by Financial
Institutions Group (25 percent), Environment, Social and Governance (11 percent) and Public-Private
Partnerships Transaction Advisory (7 percent). IEG completed 10 XPSR and 11 PCRs during the
review period. There was no Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency exposure during the period
reviewed.
Country Portfolio by Engagement Area
This section presents the main characteristics of the Philippines’ FY10–18 portfolio by pillar/subpillar of
the Philippines Country Program Evaluation. The subpillars are further called engagement areas
(table H.1). The analysis provides information regarding the scope, structure, and timeline of the Bank
Group country engagement. Each project is assigned one or more engagement areas based on the
project objectives, components, and subcomponents as described in the project documents.
Projects (Bank and IFC financing and knowledge products) included in this review were either
approved in the period FY10–18 or closed in the period FY11–18. The main characteristics of the
methodology are as follows:
• The same project can belong to (and subsequently be counted in) more than one
engagement area: the unit of analysis is effectively project activities. Therefore, summing up
the number of projects in all engagement areas returns the result that is above the portfolio
total.
• The above rule is not applied to the calculations of the commitment/actual lending, which is
done without double counting, by splitting the total cost among all relevant engagement
areas. The weight of each engagement area in such calculations is determined on the basis
105
<<<PDF_PAGE_132>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
of the project objectives and the substance of the project’s developmental work at the
subcomponent level. Splitting the cost on the basis of the subcomponent cost is avoided to
prevent assigning heavier weight to components involving creation of physical assets (in
particular, road construction or building transmission lines and power generation assets).
• Additional financing projects are not counted as separate projects; and are included in the
parent project’s commitment/actual lending.
• Actual project cost (from ICRRs/ICRs) is used for evaluated/closed World Bank projects.
106
<<<PDF_PAGE_133>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
Table H.1. Country Program Evaluation Pillars and Subpillars (Engagement Areas)
Used in the Portfolio Analysis
Pillar Engagement Area
No. Full Name Short Name No. Full Name Short Name
World Bank
I Macroeconomic Macro/Fiscal/ 1 Macroeconomic Stability and Good Macro/Fiscal/
Stability and Good Governance Governance Governance
Governance
II Private Sector–Led Private Sector 2 Private Sector–Led Economic Private Sector
Economic Growth Growth
III Better Services for the Better Services 3 Social Protection and Poverty Social Protection
Poor for the Poor
4 Rural Development/CDD Rural/CDD
5 Health Health
6 Education Education
IV Resilience to Natural Resilience 7 Mitigation Mitigation
Disasters, Climate
8 Adaptation and Environmental Adaptation and
Change, and Violent
Protection Environment
Conflicts
9 Disaster Risk Management and Disaster Risk
Related Infrastructure Management
10 FCV/Mindanao FCV/Mindanao
IFC
I Private Sector–Led Private Sector 1 Energy and Extractives Energy
Economic Growth
2 Banking/Finance Banking
3 Private Enterprise Support Private Enterprise
4 Water and Sanitation Utilities Water and San. Util.
II Resilience to Natural Resilience 5 Mitigation Mitigation
Disasters, Climate
Adaptation and Environmental Adaptation and
Change, and Violent 6
Protection Environment
Conflicts
8 FCV/Mindanao FCV/Mindanao
Note: CDD = community-driven development; FCV = fragility, conflict, and violence.
World Bank lending. The largest area of the World Bank investment in the Philippines, with one-
quarter of total lending, is Social Protection, followed by three areas where lending is slightly below
one-fifth of the total in each: Disaster Risk Management, Rural/CDD, and Macro/Fiscal/Governance.
DPLs (six loans) account for 40 percent of the World Bank lending, in the following areas of
engagement: Disaster Risk Management (36 percent), Macro/Fiscal/Governance (32 percent), and
Social Protection (22 percent). DPLs exhibit higher than average performance: the average rating for
107
<<<PDF_PAGE_134>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
DPLs is 5.3 as compared with the portfolio average of 4.0 and Investment project average of 3.8
(table H.2 and figure H.6).
Table H.2. Structure of the World Bank Portfolio by Engagement Area
Share of
Commitment or MS+ IEG
Projects Actual Lending Rating
Commitment or (no.) ($, millions) (percent)
Projects Actual Lending
Engagement Area (no.) ($, millions) DPL IPF DPL IPF
Macro/Fiscal/Governance 14 1,143 3 11 887 256 56
Private Sector 6 315 3 3 169 146 100
Social Protection 9 1,639 4 5 608 1,031 100
Rural/CDD 11 1,199 0 11 0 1,199 88
Health 4 194 0 4 0 194 33
Education 5 599 3 2 136 464 100
Mitigation 4 141 0 4 0 141 50
Adaptation and 10 510 0 10 0 510 67
Environment
Disaster Risk 4 1,232 2 2 998 234 100
Management
FCV/Mindanao 1 61 0 1 0 61 100
Total in the portfolio 32 7,034 6 26 2,798 4,236 70
Note: CDD = community-driven development; DPL = development policy loan; FCV = fragility, conflict, and violence; IEG =
Independent Evaluation Group; IPF = investment project financing; MS+ = moderately satisfactory.
The commitment/lending grew (with some annual adjustments) from FY03 to FY15. After that, there is
a steep fall in the volume of lending, dropping 13-fold between FY15 and FY17 and only marginally
recovering in 2018. The top years in terms of total commitment/lending are FY12–15. The increase
started in 2009 and ended in 2016, thus almost coinciding with President Aquino administration term
in office. Large commitments in Macro/Fiscal/Governance are observed in FY11, FY13, and FY15.
Rural/CDD experiences hikes in financing in FY14 and FY15, while Social Protection investment peaks
in FY09, FY10, and FY16. Disaster Risk Management received significant support in FY12 and FY16
(figure H.6, panel c).
108
<<<PDF_PAGE_135>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
Figure H.6. IBRD Projects by Engagement Area, Lending Instrument, and Approval
Year
a. Commitment or lending and project number by engagement area
b. Commitment or lending by engagement area and instrument type
c. Commitment or lending by engagement area and approval year
Note: CDD = community-driven development; DPL = development policy loan; DRM = disaster risk management; FCV = fragility,
conflict, and violence; IBRD = International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
109
<<<PDF_PAGE_136>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
World Bank–managed trust funds. Trust funds supported Mitigation engagement area (28 percent of
the total TF funding), followed by Rural/CDD with 18 percent of the total, and then by Adaptation and
Environment with 12 percent of the total. The total TF funding in FY10–18 amounts to $347 million.
The pillar where the TFs participate the most—$172 million—is Resilience, largely addressing
Mitigation issues (56 percent), followed by Adaptation and Environment (25 percent), FCV/Mindanao
(15 percent), and Disaster Risk Management (4 percent). The second largest pillar in terms of the TF
financing volume is Better Services for the Poor, with the total of $132 million, and almost half the total
funding there goes to Rural/CDD activities. The Macro/Fiscal/Governance pillar receives a much
smaller amount of $30 million, and Private Sector – $13.4 million (table H.3 and figure H.7, panel a).
The TF financing volume grew in FY08 and in FY15–16, peaking in FY16. Unlike lending, political cycle
did not affect TF financing (figure H.7, panel b).
Table H.3. World Bank–Managed Trust Funds by Engagement Area
Projects Volume MS+ IEG Rating
Engagement Area (no.) ($, millions) (percent)
Macro/Fiscal/Governance 41 30.1 73
Private Sector 8 13.4 100
Rural/CDD 32 61.4 81
Social Protection 8 17.0 25
Health 5 16.2 25
Education 3 36.8 0
Mitigation 28 95.5 57
Adaptation and Environment 25 42.8 64
Disaster Risk Management 9 7.5 83
FCV/Mindanao 14 26.3 80
Total in the portfolio 99 347 65
Note: CDD = community-driven development; FCV = fragility, conflict, and violence; IEG = Independent Evaluation Group; MS+ =
moderately satisfactory or above.
110
<<<PDF_PAGE_137>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
Figure H.7. Philippines Trust Fund Funding by Engagement Area and Approval Year
a. Funding volume and project by engagement area b. Funding by engagement area and approval year
World Bank ASA. ASA support was mostly provided to the engagement area of
Macro/Fiscal/Governance followed by Social Protection and Disaster Risk Management. Total ASA
cost in FY10–18 was $72.7 million, of which $48.2 million (66 percent) was financed by TFs and
$24.5 million (34 percent) from the World Bank budget. The pillar with the top cost ($30 million) and
the highest number of ASA (131) is Macro/Fiscal/Governance, where TFs cover 60 percent of the
cost. The second largest pillar by cost is Better Services for the Poor: the total is $19 million
(59 percent financed by TFs), covering 119 projects. Resilience pillar was supported by 107 ASA with
the cost of $18 million, 79 percent funded by the TFs; and the smallest pillar is Private Sector, with 31
ASA and $6 million financing, 79 percent of which came from the TFs (figure H.8 and table H.4).
Figure H.8. Advisory Services and Analytics by Main Engagement Areas
Note: CDD = community-driven development; DRM = disaster risk management; Env. = environment; FCV = fragility, conflict, and
violence.
111
<<<PDF_PAGE_138>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
Table H.4. World Bank Advisory Services and Analytics by Engagement Area
Projects Cost
Cost (no.) ($, millions)
Projects
Engagement Area (no.) ($, millions) EW TA EW TA
Macro/Fiscal/Governance 131 29.9 51 80 8.3 21.6
Private Sector 31 5.7 8 23 0.6 5.1
Rural/CDD 37 4.4 15 22 1.6 2.8
Social Protection 49 9.4 23 26 2.6 6.8
Health 18 2.6 8 10 0.3 2.3
Education 15 2.7 11 4 1.9 0.8
Mitigation 29 2.6 11 18 0.5 2.1
Adaptation and Environment 39 5.4 16 23 2.8 2.6
Disaster Risk Management 23 6.1 11 12 0.5 5.6
FCV/Mindanao 16 4.0 7 9 2.5 1.5
Total in the portfolio 201 72.7 76 125 21.5 51.2
Note: CDD = community-driven development; EW = economic work; FCV = fragility, conflict, and violence TA = technical
assistance.
IFC investment. IFC’s total net commitment in FY10–18 was $1,212 million. The largest areas of
support were Mitigation with $343 (28 percent of the total), followed by Energy ($308 million or
25 percent) and Banking/Finance ($292 million or 24 percent). All closed projects have received an MS
rating or above. Ratings by engagement area range from the highest in Energy (5.3) to the lowest in
Banking/Finance (4.2; figure H.9, panel a, and table H.5). The net commitment peaked in FY09, FY11,
and FY18 and was significantly lower in the rest of the reviewed period. The top years in terms of total
net commitment are FY18 and FY09, explained by larger projects. Engagement in terms of number of
projects is maintained throughout the period, with the exception of FY08 and FY14 when no projects
were approved (figure H.9, panel b).
112
<<<PDF_PAGE_139>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
Figure H.9. IFC Lending by Engagement Area and Approval Year
a. Net commitment and project number by engagement area
b. Net commitment by engagement area and approval year
Note: CDD = community-driven development; DRM = disaster risk management; Env. = environment; FCV = fragility, conflict, and
violence.
113
<<<PDF_PAGE_140>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
Table H.5. International Finance Corporation Lending by Engagement Area
Share of MS+ IEG
Projects* Net Commitment Rating Average IEG
Engagement Areas (no.) ($, millions) (percent) Rating
Private Enterprise 10 150 100 4.3
Banking/Finance 16 292 100 4.2
Energy 14 308 100 5.3
Water and Sanitation Utilities 1 22 100 n.a.
Mitigation 13 343 100 5.0
Adaptation and Environment 6 91 100 4.5
FCV/Mindanao 2 6 100 n.a.
Total in the portfolio 31 1,212 100 4.6
IFC AS. The largest area of IFC’s Advisory Services support in terms of net commitment is
Banking/Finance, followed by Private Enterprise and Mitigation. The Advisory Services projects have
received mixed ratings, and only 55 percent of the evaluated ones have MS rating or above. The
ratings range from the highest in Mitigation (4.2) to the lowest in Private Enterprise and
Banking/Finance (both equal to 3.5; figure H.10 and table H.7).
Figure H.10. International Finance Corporation Advisory Services by Engagement
Area
114
<<<PDF_PAGE_141>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
Table H.7. International Finance Corporation Advisory Services by Engagement
Area
Projects Net Commitment MS+ IEG Rating Average IEG
Engagement Area (no.) ($, millions) (percent) Rating
Private Enterprise 8 11.1 50 3.5
Banking/Finance 15 22.7 50 3.5
Energy 11 6.9 50 4.0
Water and Sanitation Utilities 4 1.1 n.a. n.a.
Mitigation 14 10.1 60 4.2
Adaptation and Environment 8 6.5 n.a. n.a.
FCV/Mindanao 2 2.8 100 4.0
Total in the portfolio 34 61 55 3.7
Note: IEG = Independent Evaluation Group; MS+ = moderately satisfactory or above; n.a. – not available.
ASA Assessment
The ASA assessment is based on a semistructured review of selected ASA projects (25 projects, over
10 percent of the total) conducted by IEG Philippines Country Program Evaluation team. The
outcomes of the review are aggregated at the pillar/area of engagement level (see table H.2) and
presented by evaluation dimensions (relevance, technical quality, results, and sustainability).
Percentages in this note show the average score of each pillar by evaluation dimension. The scores
are calculated based on 24 quantitative indicators (structured “yes-no” questions answered during the
review; table H.8). The number of such indicators ranges from three to nine by dimension. The review
also included three general structured questions, several open-ended questions, and comments to
the structured questions.
Table H.8. ASA Assessment by Pillar and Evaluative Question
(percentage of positive answers)
Macro/
Fiscal/ Private Better Services
Evaluative Question Governance Sectora for the Poor Resilience Total
A. General
Was the activity part of a 29 29 67 22 30
programmatic ASA/TA series?
Was the activity prepared in 29 25 67 44 33
support of lending operations?
B. Relevance
B.1. Were the issues addressed 86 50 100 100 70
by the ASA/TA identified as a
115
<<<PDF_PAGE_142>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
Macro/
Fiscal/ Private Better Services
Evaluative Question Governance Sectora for the Poor Resilience Total
development constraint or
opportunity in the Country
Partnership Strategy or other
work?
B.2. Was the ASA/TA product 86 42 100 44 55
designed as complementary to
other activities (lending or
nonlending) in the Country
Partnership Strategy?
B3. Were the outputs of the
activity used to
B3a. inform policy dialogue 100 17 100 11 52
B3b. raise stakeholder 100 50 100 78 70
awareness
B3c. contribute to the design 67 17 56 0 29
of lending products
B3d. contribute to the design 57 0 67 22 22
of country partnership
B4. The activity was conducted
B4a. jointly with government 43 96 33 67 80
counterparts
B4b. essentially by the World 57 13 100 33 30
Bank
B4c. jointly with other 43 8 67 44 27
development partners
C. Technical quality
C.1. Did the activity convey best 86 65 100 100 79
practice?
C.2. Did the activity generate new 100 13 100 71 49
evidence or data that inform
analysis and decision making?
C.3. Did the ASA/TA provide 100 71 100 100 84
actionable recommendations
consistent with the findings and
the conclusions?
C.4. Was the activity team staffed 71 67 100 100 78
with appropriate experts from
inside and outside the World
Bank?
116
<<<PDF_PAGE_143>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
Macro/
Fiscal/ Private Better Services
Evaluative Question Governance Sectora for the Poor Resilience Total
C.5. Did the activity identify and 43 56 100 100 67
make use of local expertise?
(local organizations, south to
south learning) in the
planning/design, results analysis,
report writing, dissemination.
D. Results
D.1. Were the activity’s outputs 100 63 67 89 77
delivered timely to inform
important decisions?
D2. Were the outputs of the
activity used to
D2a. inform policy 100 8 67 89 45
D2b. design/reform 86 17 67 100 50
government programs
D2c. build recipient capacity 0 71 33 89 65
D2d. support the design of 29 4 100 89 34
World Bank operations/
strategy
D.3. Did the activity include 29 100 0 44 72
clearly measurable result
indicators?
D.4. Was the product of the 100 42 33 100 65
activity discussed with the key
counterparts in the government of
the Philippines and presented /
disclosed externally?
E. Sustainability
E.1. Are the outcomes of the 71 54 67 78 65
activity likely to be lasting?
E.2. Did the outcomes of the 57 60 33 78 64
activity contribute to
strengthening/developing
institutions?
E.3. Did the activity contribute to 0 17 33 89 35
strengthening analytical and
policy formulation capacity of the
recipients?
Note: ASA = Advisory Services and Analytics; TA = technical assistance.
a. Mainly International Finance Corporation Advisory Services.
117
<<<PDF_PAGE_144>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
Almost all the ASA reviewed (93 percent) have high technical quality, three-quarters are characterized
by high level of results, two-thirds are considered sustainable and relevant (figure H.11 and table H.9).
While technical quality earned top rating across pillars, the rest differs by pillar. In particular, relevance
is highest (87 percent) in Better Services for the Poor, and ranges between 32 percent and 68 percent
in other pillars. Sustainability is high in Resilience (87 percent) but lower in Macro/Fiscal/Governance
and Better Services for the Poor (48 and 61 percent, respectively). The same is observed on results:
higher scores in Resilience (88 percent), and lower in Macro/Fiscal/Governance and Better Services
for the Poor (both at 67 percent).
118
<<<PDF_PAGE_145>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
Figure H.11. Average Share of Positive Answers by Evaluation Dimension
a. By pillar
b. By ASA Type (World Bank only)
Note: ASA = Advisory Services and Analytics; EW = economic work; TA = technical assistance.
119
<<<PDF_PAGE_146>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
Table H.9. Answers by Pillar and Evaluation Dimensions
(percentage positive answers)
Pillar
Question Macro/Fiscal/ Private Sector Better Services Resilience Total
Governance for the Poor
Technical quality 81 54 100 100 71
Results 67 43 67 88 58
Sustainability 48 44 61 87 55
Relevance 68 32 87 62 48
Relevance. The overall relevance score is a combination of low and high scores for nine indicators. In
almost all cases, the ASA address development constraints identified in the Country Partnership
Strategy, inform policy dialogue, and raise stakeholder awareness. Only one-third of reviewed ASA
contributed to the design of the lending products, and 22 percent added value to the design of the
Country Partnership (within the World Bank, 75 percent of the economic work and 11 percent of
technical assistance). The overall relevance score is negatively affected by low incidence of joint
economic work production with the government and other development partners and by rare cases
when IFC ASs are done jointly with other development partners or contribute to the design of country
partnership. The qualitative assessment demonstrates that the ASA program was designed
strategically, with mutual complementarity of products—forming platforms for diagnostic and policy
advice, and that it provided useful evidence-based analysis, and brought stakeholders together.
However, some highly technical ASA were considered hard to apply at the current reform stage and
considering existing capacity.
Technical quality. Technical quality earned top ratings across pillars. This includes very high scores for
conveying best practice, generating new evidence to inform analysis and decision making, and
providing actionable recommendations. World Bank ASA used best practice tools and advanced
methodologies and involved local counterparts.
Results and sustainability. On results and sustainability, the ASA were assessed to be lasting and
informative for policy design, but less so for impact on government capacity and the quality of
institutions (except in Resilience). The assessment demonstrated that the ASA influenced government
decisions and delivered clear advice and recommendations, although in some cases were unable to
generate high interest from the government. Some ASA led to a high level of government ownership
through capacity building tasks (in particular, in the areas of climate change and power sector reform),
thus increasing sustainability of the outcomes. Technical assistance contributed to sustainability of
developmental efforts by bringing together and helping achieve consensus among stakeholders (for
example in Disaster Risk Management). In other cases, efforts to convene various stakeholders did not
succeed due to the specifics of the sectors (transport), or lack of a champion, or when highly
technical/sophisticated advice/strategy did not provide sufficient entry points for long-term
120
<<<PDF_PAGE_147>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
engagement or was discounted considering the immediate priorities. ASA production involved
collaboration with the client, but there were also cases of missed opportunities in utilizing local
expertise.
Other observations. The average length of the ASA implementation or preparation was 1,159 days.
Within the World Bank only, the length was 798 days—almost twice as high for technical assistance
projects as for EWs (838 days and 497 days, respectively). By pillar, the preparation length was 417
days in Macro/Fiscal/Governance; 1,445 in Private Sector; 1,460 in Better Services for the Poor; and
874 days in Resilience. One-third of the ASA were programmatic, which is a high number explained by
the strategic approach to ASA in the Philippines. Most of the World Bank ASA (63 percent) are funded
by both World Bank budget and TF.
Main Conclusions
World Bank lending and TF project financing. World Bank lending by project number is three times smaller
than the TF, but the volume of financing is more than 20 times higher. The growing TF volume can
compensate for (recently observed) drop in the World Bank lending only within engagement areas where it
provides comparable funding – mostly FCV/Mindanao and Mitigation. With only one World Bank lending
project ($61 million) on FCV/Mindanao, 12 TF projects with a comparable total funding of $22.6 million
could be critical to increase the impact. Similarly, in the Mitigation area, with only four Bank projects and
comparable financing from the World Bank and the TFs ($141 million and $82.3 million respectively), TF
involvement makes a big difference. On the other hand, when six World Bank loans with Private Sector
actions and volume of financing of $315 million are supported by seven TFs totaling $11.5 million in funding,
TF’s transaction costs might be too high considering the impact. The situation is similar in
Macro/Fiscal/Governance (table H.10).
121
<<<PDF_PAGE_148>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
Table H.10. Comparison of IBRD Lending and TF Portfolios by Engagement Area
Projects Commitment or Lending
(no.) ($, millions)
TFs: project Ratio: TFs: project Ratio:
Engagement Area IBRD financing TF/IBRD IBRD financing IBRD/TF
Macro/Fiscal/Governance 14 35 2.5 1,143 26.0 44.1
Private Sector 6 7 1.1 315 11.5 27.3
Social Protection 9 28 3.1 1,639 52.9 31.0
Rural/CDD 11 7 0.6 1,199 14.7 81.8
Health 4 4 1.1 194 14.0 13.9
Education 5 3 0.5 599 31.7 18.9
Mitigation 4 24 6.0 141 82.3 1.7
Adaptation and Environment 10 22 2.2 510 36.8 13.9
Disaster Risk Management 4 8 1.9 1,232 6.5 189.9
FCV/Mindanao 1 12 12.1 61 22.6 2.7
Total in the portfolio 32 85 2.7 7,034 299 23.5
Note: CDD = community-driven development; FCV = fragility, conflict, and violence; IBRD = International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development; TF = trust fund.
World Bank portfolio focus. World Bank lending was geared toward particular engagement areas
(Social Protection, Disaster Risk Management, Rural/CDD, and Macro/Fiscal/Governance) where the
volume of lending was highest and project performance has been more successful (table H.11). It
would be important to maintain lending in those areas, while using TFs to fill the gaps in others. Within
both Social Protection and Rural/CDD, the World Bank has had a stable engagement over the years,
with project approvals and significant volume of lending throughout the reviewed period. The Disaster
Risk Management engagement has also been stable since 2012. At the other end of the scale of the
volume of World Bank lending are areas such as FCV/Mindanao, Mitigation, and Adaptation and
Environment, which benefited from significant TF funding, which is likely to continue to be available.
122
<<<PDF_PAGE_149>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
Table H.11. Average Independent Evaluation Group Ratings by Engagement Area
Average Independent
Engagement Area Evaluation Group Rating
Social Protection 5.7
Private Sector 5.0
Education 4.5
Disaster Risk Management 4.5
Rural/CDD 4.3
Macro/Fiscal/Governance 4.1
FCV/Mindanao 4.0
Adaptation and Environment 3.7
Mitigation 3.5
Health 3.0
Note: CDD = community-driven development; FCV = fragility, conflict, and violence.
World Bank ASA program. The expansion of the ASA support to the Philippines from FY13 to FY16
was fueled by the availability of TF financing, especially in Mitigation, Rural/CDD, and Adaptation and
Environment. The ASA program adequately supported operations both in terms of the number of
products by engagement area and coverage of topics within engagement areas. The share of TF
funding in total cost has been increasing through the review period until FY16. All engagement areas
received significant ASA support: there is at least three times more ASA than lending projects by
engagement area. The engagement areas with the top ASA to loan ratio (from 10 to 17) are
FCV/Mindanao and Macro/Fiscal/Governance. However, when TFs are considered, the difference
among areas of engagement in this respect drops (figure H.12, panel b).
ASA assessment. Assessment of selected ASA demonstrated that the knowledge products had high
technical quality, were often based on best Global Practice, generated new evidence relevant for
decision making, and typically had impact on stakeholder awareness. They addressed pivotal country
program issues and included discussions with counterparts. However, some knowledge products
were often produced essentially by the World Bank, and their impact on government capacity,
institution strengthening, and the ability of the government to formulate policies was limited. In some
cases, the highly technical knowledge products were hard to apply to the ongoing policy processes
and the sophisticated advice/strategy did not provide sufficient entry points for long-term engagement
or was discounted considering the current priorities.
123
<<<PDF_PAGE_150>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
Figure H.12. Comparison of ASA and IBRD lending/TF financing
a. Trend in ASA production its cost, and the share of TF funding over the review period
b. Ratio of ASA to loans and to the sum of loans and TFs (by project number)
Note: ASA = Advisory Services and Analytics; CDD = community-driven development; DRM = disaster risk management; FCV =
fragility, conflict, and violence; TF = trust fund.
World Bank and IFC programs. Although the structure of the two programs by main engagement
areas differs and therefore their direct comparison is not possible, one pillar —Resilience—is identical
in both programs (has the same list of engagement areas). Within that pillar, the volume of IFC
investment in Mitigation is 2.4 times above that of the World Bank ($343 million and $141 million,
respectively). At the same time, the World Bank invests 5.6 times more in Adaptation and Environment
than IFC ($510 million and $91 million, respectively). The knowledge programs of the World Bank and
124
<<<PDF_PAGE_151>>>
Appendix H
Portfolio Review
IFC have almost identical costs of slightly above 61 million. The IFC’s projects are significantly larger
on average, and the ratio of the knowledge support cost to the lending volume is much higher. Even
when compared with the World Bank’s technical assistance support only (which would be a more
correct comparison considering that the nature of the Advisory Services work), the conclusions stay
the same. This outcome is even more impressive considering that IFC Advisory Services are paid for
by the clients while World Bank ASA are supported financially by the World Bank budget and TFs.
1 If these nine additional financing projects and the two projects approved during the review period and then canceled
were counted here, the total number of International Bank for Reconstruction and Development loans would be 43.
125
<<<PDF_PAGE_152>>>

<<<PDF_PAGE_153>>>
The World Bank Group Partnership
with the Philippines, 2009–18
Country Program Evaluation
The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20433
The
World
Bank
Group
Partnership
with
the
Republic
of
the
Philippines